1
Tsez

Bernard Comrie* and Maria Polinsky‡
*University of California, Santa Barbara; ‡University of Maryland, College Park

1.
Introduction1

1.1.
Area and speakers

Tsez (Dido) is a member of the Tsezic group within the Nakh-Daghestanian
language family. It has 12,467 speakers in the Russian Federation according to the 2010
census (VPN 2010). The name Tsez derives from the indigenous self-designation cez or
cezi, while the alternative Dido is the Georgian designation. The traditional lands of the
Tsez are more or less coterminous with the Tsunta district (cuntinskij rajon) in
Daghestan, excluding the Bezhta division (bežtinskij učastok), inhabited by speakers of
Bezhta and Hunzib, and the village of Genukh, where speakers of Hinuq live.
Approximately half of the Tsez continue to live in this area, the other half have
migrated to Lowland parts of Daghestan, in particular to the Shamkhal area near
Makhachkala.

1.2.
Dialects

The usually accepted subdivision of Tsez dialects follows that proposed by
Imnajšvili (1963: 9–10), which recognizes a primary distinction between the Sagada
(soƛ’o) dialect and the rest, which in turn are divided into Kidero (kidiro), Shaytl
(ešiƛ’), Asakh (asaq), Shapikh (šapiħ), and Elbok (elboq’) — the names in parentheses
are the Tsez versions. The Mokok (newo) dialect is, however, sufficiently different from
Kidero to be considered a separate dialect. The Sagada dialect diverges enough from the
others to impair mutual intelligibility, and Sagada speakers need to make
accommodations in interaction with speakers of other dialects. The other dialects are all
mutually intelligible, and none has noticeably greater prestige than any other. The
material in this article follows the Tsebari (ceboru) subdialect of Asakh, except where
otherwise specified.

1 This article is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grants BCS-9220219, BCS-0131946 and BCS-1144223. It incorporates material
provided by Ramazan Rajabov in his capacity as Research Assistant to BCS-9220219.
We are grateful to Bert Vaux and the late Helma van den Berg for comments on earlier
versions.

2
1.3.
Sociolinguistic situation

Tsez has the official status of an unwritten language. A primer for use in schools
has been prepared (Alekseev 1993; Alekseev, Radžabov & Abdulaev 2003), but seems
to be little used. Occasional pieces in Tsez appear in the local newspaper Didojskie vesti
<http://cunta.ru/didoyskievesti>, as well as occasional small publications, e.g. of
poetry. But by far the most substantial collection of Tsez texts is the folklore anthology
(Abdulaev & Abdullaev 2010). All of these, like the dictionary (Xalilov 1999), make
use of adaptations of Avar Cyrillic orthography (see section 2.2); Avar and Tsez
phonologies are typologically quite close.

The traditional lingua franca of the area is Avar, which is still taught as a school
subject in Tsez schools. However, the younger generation is more fluent in Russian,
which is also the medium of education in Tsez schools. Prior to the break-up of the
Soviet Union, the Russo-Georgian armed conflict, and the closure of the border,
economic ties with the neighboring Georgian province of Kakhetia meant that there was
also some knowledge of Georgian in the Tsez community; nowadays, there is no
impetus to acquire or maintain competence in Georgian. At the end of the 20th century
there were still a few elderly monolingual speakers of Tsez.

Tsez is the main language of everyday communication for Tsez speakers in the
Tsunta District, and children grow up speaking it as their first and, at least until
recently, only language before entering school. But two recent factors have made
Russian more salient in village life: accessibility to modern media, and the influx of
members of the armed forces into what is now an international frontier area.

1.4.
State of research

Although some basic material on Tsez is provided in Dirr (1909), the first
reasonably detailed published sketch of the language is Bokarev (1959); a more up-to-
date sketch is provided by Alekseev & Radžabov (1989). The fullest monograph
grammar to date is Imnajšvili (1963), while a grammar meeting contemporary standards
is under preparation by Polinsky & Comrie (in prep). The latter will also include a full
bibliography of earlier work. Xalilov (1999) is a dictionary of about 7500 entries, the
first and so far only substantial dictionary of the language.

2.
Phonology

2.1.
Vowels and consonants

Tables 1–2 present the segmental phonemes of Tsez. In Table 1, the three series
of plain stops are, in order: voiceless nonejective, voiceless ejective, voiced; the two

3
series of affricates are voiceless nonejective, voiceless ejective; the two series of
fricatives are voiceless and voiced.

Tsez has no phonemic glottal stop, although a nonphonemic glottal stop occurs
before word-initial nonpharyngealized vowels, e.g. aw [ʔaw] ‘mouse’.

The pharyngealized consonants shown in Table 1 can occur word-initially, -
medially, and -finally, e.g. q’ˁim ‘head’, oʁˁ ‘leg’; they pharyngealize an immediately
following vowel. Note that the expected /χˁ/ has shifted to /ħ/ and represents the only
source of this phoneme in indigenous morphemes. In addition, Tsez has a phonetically
identical pharyngealization that can occur only with word-initial (C)V sequences, as in
ˁo ‘ax’, ɬˁono ‘six’; we represent this pharyngealization by means of a superscript
symbol after the consonant (if any) and before the vowel. Words with initial ˁV, though
phonetically [ʕVˁ], behave as vowel-initial for purposes of gender agreement, cf. b-
ˁaƛ’u-χ ‘III-fall-PRS’. The precise phonological analysis of pharyngealization (or
epiglottalization) in Tsez remains controversial: Starostin (1987: 465–466) and
Nikolayev & Starostin (1994: 59, 115), like Bokarev (1959), treat it as a vocalic feature,
while Kodzasov (1986) and Kibrik & Kodzasov 1990: 315, 318) argue that phonetically
the locus of pharyngealization in Tsez is the consonant of a CV sequence. Our analysis
here follows Maddieson et al. (1996). On this analysis, segmental /ʕ/ occurs only in
loans.

Labialized consonants occur only prevocalically, e.g. ʁˁʷaj ‘dog’, and are rare
other than in loans from Avar and in certain morphological forms, often as the result of
the morphophonemic loss of the vowel /u/ before another vowel, e.g. stem -esu- ‘find’,
infinitive -esʷ-a. Most consonants are attested labialized, with the exception of labials,
n, l, j, and ʕ (though rʷ does occur, as do q’ˁʷ, qˁʷ, and ʁˁʷ). It should be noted,
however, that the Mokok dialect has lost all labialization.

Table 1
Tsez Consonants (Nonlabialized)

Plain stop
Affricate Fricative Nasal Liquid Semivowel
Bilabial
p
p’
b

m

w
Apical
t
t’
d
c
c’
s
z
n
r
lateral

ƛ
ƛ’
ɬ

l
Palatal

č
č’
š
ž

j
Velar
k
k’
g
Uvular

q’

q

χ
ʁ
pharyngealized
q’ˁ

qˁ

ʁˁ
Pharyngeal

ħ
ʕ

4
Glottal

h

The long vowel a: occurs only in native morphemes and only under certain
morphological conditions, for instance as the result of vowel lengthening in some verb
forms, e.g. -iš- ‘eat’, future indefinite -a:š. In the Asakh dialect, all vowel qualities are
neutralized under lengthening to a:. Other dialects (e.g. Mokok) also have a low front
vowel, representable as ä: and reflecting the lengthening of the front vowels e and i, and
some also have a long mid back rounded vowel o:, reflecting the lengthening of the
rounded vowels o and u. Distinctive vowel length appears to be being lost in the Kidero
dialect (Kibrik & Kodzasov 1990: 329).

Table 2
Tsez Vowels (Nonpharyngealized)

Short

Long

Front Central Back
Central
High i

u

Mid
e

o

Low
a

a:

2.2.
Script and transcription

Tsez is officially an unwritten language, and in practice various adaptations of
the Avar writing system have been used. The most consistent such system used in
running text is to be found in Abdulaev & Abdullaev (2003), which uses the
correspondences shown in Table 3.

Table 3
Tsez phoneme : grapheme correspondences

a
а
d
д
š
ш
e
э, е
c
ц
ž
ж
i
и
c’
цӀ
j
й
o
о
s
с
k
к
u
у
z
з
k’
кӀ

n
н
q
хъ
p
п
r
р
q’
къ
p’
пӀ
ƛ
лӀ
g
г
b
б
ƛ’
кь
χ
х

5
m
м
ɬ
лъ
ʁ
гъ
w
в
l
л
ħ
хъ
t
т
č
ч
ʕ
гӀ
t’
тӀ
č’
чӀ
h
гь

For /e/, <е> is used after consonants, <э> elsewhere. /ja/ and /ju/ are written <я>,
<ю>. Long /a:/ and /ä:/ are written <а̄>, <аь>. Labialization is indicated by <в>
after the consonant grapheme. /CˁV/ sequences are written <CVӀ>, while
pharyngealization in the syllable coda is indicated by an apostrophe after the consonant
grapheme.

2.3.
Phonotactics

By far the most common syllable structure in native words is CV. Syllable-final
consonants are also frequent morpheme-finally, whether or not word-finally, but are rare
morpheme-medially. Syllable-initial vowels are found only word-initially (except in
unassimilated loans), and phonetically take a prothetic [ʔ] (if nonpharyngealized) or [ʕ]
(if pharyngealized). Examples: besuro ‘fish’, genitive 1 besuro-s, kid ‘girl’, asa
‘mountain ash’, ˁomoj ‘donkey’, is ‘bull’, equative 1 is-ce, qondu ‘cave’, oc’c’ino ‘ten’
(in other dialects oc’ino). Morpheme-medial clusters of two consonants are frequent in
loans, e.g. ˁaq’lu ‘wisdom, intellect’ (from Arabic via Avar), wacʕal ‘cousin’ (from
Avar). Most dialects allow syllable-final w/jC clusters, e.g. Mokok zow-s ‘be-PSTWIT’,
but the Asakh dialect does not, e.g. Tsebari zow-si.

2.4.
Prosody

Kibrik & Kodzasov (1990: 329) and Nikolayev & Starostin (1994: 115) note the
existence of prosodic contrasts in Tsez words, but we have not investigated the area of
prosody further. A targeted study is very much needed.

2.5.
Morphophonemics

The major general phonological and morphophonemic processes are as follows:

1) A vowel is dropped before another vowel, e.g. besuro ‘fish’, in.essive besur-a:, -ik’i-
‘go’, infinitive -ik’-a, haqu ‘mouth’, in.essive haq-a:. However,

1a) Final u of a verb stem is realized as labialization of the preceding consonant before
a vowel, e.g. -esu- ‘find’, infinitive -esʷ-a.

6
2) Clusters of two consonants word-finally or of three consonants word-medially are
broken up by inserting the vowel e, e.g. is ‘bull’, lative is-er, -iš- ‘eat’, causative -iš-er-
(e.g. present -iš-er-χo, but infinitive -iš-r-a, where the environment for e-insertion is not
met). However,

2a) After j, i is inserted rather than e, e.g. zej ‘bear’, genitive 1 zej-is. This applies
specifically to the Asakh dialect, since other dialects allow final jC clusters, e.g. Mokok
zej-s.

3) Verbs have a stem used in certain forms, for instance the future indefinite, which
involves lengthening of the vowel before the last consonant of the stem, e.g. -iš- ‘eat’,
future indefinite -a:š, -ik’i- ‘go’, future indefinite -a:k’i. The lengthened vowel, under
appropriate circumstances, may be the inserted vowel, e.g. t’et’r- ‘read’, future
indefinite t’et’a:r.

4) Some inflectional suffixes have the shape -CV, but drop the final vowel word-finally
after a vowel. Compare is ‘bull’, super.essive is-ƛ’o, super.lative is-ƛ’o-r with besuro
‘fish’, super.essive besuro-ƛ’, super.lative besuro-ƛ’o-r. Such suffixes are represented as
-ƛ’(o), etc.

There are other, more sporadic morphophonemic alternations. For instance, the
past participle of the verb t’et’r- ‘read’ is t’et’a:r-u (< t’et’r- + past participle suffix -
ru with lengthening of the vowel before the last consonant of the stem, followed by
simplification of rr to r). The fourth morphological group of verbs involves an
alternation between stem-final d and j (section 3.6.1).

3.
Morphology: Word classes and inflection

3.1.
Overview

Tsez morphology is largely suffixing, although there is also some stem-internal
change, prefixing restricted to the gender prefixes, and occasional suppletion, e.g. in the
second person singular pronoun. Reduplication is used to derive nouns, often with a
change in the initial syllable of the second component, e.g. χisi-basi ‘changes’, biχ-miχ
‘herbs’, and also for onomatopoeia (e.g. ħi-ħi ‘neigh’) and to intensify the meaning of
adjectives and verbs (e.g. r-oč’i-r-oč’ij ‘very cold’, -ok’-ok’- ‘strike repeatedly’).

The two most diametrically opposed word classes, nouns and verbs, are readily
distinguished by their radically different morphologies. In particular, nouns obligatorily
mark case, while verbs obligatorily mark tense-mood-aspect-evidentiality, except in

7
nonfinite forms, which have equally distinctive markers. Attributive and predicative
adjectives do not inflect for case, though they do for number. Pronouns differ from
nouns primarily in their more irregular morphology, while demonstrative pronouns used
attributively have a simplified case opposition absolutive versus oblique. Numerals are
identified primarily in semantic terms. Tsez has few basic adverbs, most being (either
transparently or plausibly in diachronic terms) case forms of nouns or pronouns and
converbs of verbs. There are also few basic postpositions, most also being usable as
adverbs.

3.2.
Nouns

3.2.1. Gender

Tsez has four genders (traditionally called noun classes) in the singular; in the
plural, and also in some singular pronouns, there is a two-way distinction between
gender I and gender II-IV (non-I). Gender is shown only by (i) the gender agreement
prefixes on most vowel-initial adjectives and verbs, some adverbs, some postpositions
(section 0) and one particle; (ii) the forms of certain pronouns and numerals, which
have the two-way opposition I versus II-IV (sections 0–0). The gender prefixes referred
to in (i) are shown in Table 4.

Table 4
Tsez Gender Prefixes

Singular Plural
I
Ø-
b-
II
j-

III b-
r-
IV r-

Gender I consists of all and only nouns denoting male humans and male
supernatural creatures. The core of gender II comprises nouns denoting female humans,
although it also contains a number of inanimate nouns. The core of gender III comprises
nouns referring to animals, though it also contains a number of inanimate nouns and the
nouns ‘child’ and ‘devil’. Gender IV contains only inanimate nouns. Both formal and
semantic principles are involved in the assignment of inanimate nouns to genders (see
Plaster et al. 2013 for details and overview of the earlier literature, and Gagliardi &
Lidz 2014 for the acquisition of genders in child language). One formal principle is that

8
derived inanimate nouns are usually assigned to gender IV, e.g. abstract nouns with the
suffix -ɬi (see also section 0 for the gender of compound nouns). We know of one noun
with singular and plural genders that do not match: χeχ-bi ‘child, children’ is gender III
in the singular (though this assignment is being replaced by gender I in current usage),
but gender I in the plural.

3.2.2. Number and case

Tsez nouns distinguish overtly the categories of number and case. The
morphology of number and case is in general straightforward, despite the relative
richness of the case system. The main complication in Tsez noun morphology is that a
large number of nouns have a stem, used before inflectional suffixes, that is distinct
from the absolutive singular, viz. the so-called oblique stem. Some nouns with such a
distinct stem use it before local case suffixes and equative -ce, while other such nouns
use their absolutive singular as stem here (except for the IN series, where the same stem
as in nonlocal oblique cases is used). Some nouns use different stems (one of which
may be the same as the absolutive singular) before some combination of oblique
singular, absolutive plural, and oblique plural. In addition, many nouns allow variants.
The most frequent difference between the absolutive singular and the stem used for
other forms is the addition of a final segment or segment sequence in the latter, e.g. mec
‘tongue’, in.essive mec-r-a:, lative mec-r-er, super.essive mec-r-eƛ’, plural absolutive
mec-r-ebi, lative mec-r-eza-r. But ɬi ‘water’ adds -a:- in the singular oblique (e.g.
genitive 1 ɬ-a:-s), but -da- in the plural absolutive (ɬi-da-bi), as well as having an
idiosyncratic ergative singular ɬij-a:. Oblique singular stems ending in o usually shift
this to a in the absolutive plural, e.g. giri ‘pole’, singular genitive 1 giri-mo-s, plural
absolutive giri-ma-bi, genitive 1 giri-mo-za-s. The most frequent additions in the
oblique stem are -mo, -m (these two largely in complementary distribution), -r, and -jo.
Some nouns have more idiosyncratic relations between the absolutive singular and the
stem used before case or number suffixes, such as loss of a final vowel (e.g. boc’i
‘wolf’, genitive 1 boc’-es) or even a longer sequence (e.g. ozuri ‘eye’, genitive 1 oz-es),
internal vowel change (e.g. buq ‘sun’, genitive 1 beq-es); these processes can even be
combined (e.g. esij ‘brother’, plural absolutive es-na-bi, moči ‘place’, genitive 1 meč-o-
s). There are, however, no instances of suppletion in noun morphology.

Number is a binary distinction between singular and plural. For nearly all nouns,
the singular is unmarked, the plural suffixed. The regular plural suffixes are absolutive -
bi, oblique -za- (to which latter further case suffixes are added), e.g. besuro ‘fish’, plural
absolutive besuro-bi, lative besuro-za-r. A small number of nouns take an alternative
absolutive plural suffix -a, e.g. ʁˁul ‘stone’, plural absolutive ʁˁul-a, lative ʁˁul-a-r or,
with etymologically double plural marking, ʁˁul-a-za-r. Two nouns use what is

9
etymologically a plural form as both singular and plural, namely ʁˁana-bi ‘woman,
women’, χeχ-bi ‘child, children’; gender agreement, however, goes with the singular or
plural sense.

The nonlocal cases are: absolutive -Ø, ergative -a: (identical to in.essive) for
most nouns, but -Ø for some nouns with an oblique stem ending in -o, genitive 1 -s
(used as attribute to an absolutive head noun), genitive 2 -z (used as attribute to a non-
absolutive head noun), lative -r (the same as the directional suffix discussed below),
instrumental -d, and on the periphery of the system two equatives, in -ce and -q’a:j. The
presence of two genitive forms reflects the limited case concord found in Tsez
prenominal modifiers; these modifiers distinguish between the absolutive and all other
cases of the head noun.
The singular forms of besuro ‘fish’ and is ‘bull’ are shown in Table 5.

Table 5
Tsez Case Marking

ABS
besuro
is
ERG
besur-a:
is-a:
GEN 1 besuro-s
is-es
GEN 2 besuro-z
is-ez
DAT
besuro-r
is-er
INS
besuro-d
is-ed
EQU 1 besuro-ce
is-ce
EQU 2 besuro-q’a:j is-q’a:j

The equative 1 seems to be a case, on the basis of its attachment to oblique stems (see
below), e.g. ca-dara-ce ‘like a star’ (ca, oblique stem ca-dara- ‘star’), but it can also
attach to case-marked forms of nouns, e.g. besuro-s-ce ‘like a fish’s’.

The same suffixes are used in the plural, e.g. besuro-bi, besuro-z-a:, besuro-za-s,
etc.

The spatial (local) cases form a rich array distinguishing seven locational series
multiplied by four directional series multiplied by a non-distal versus distal (‘over
there’) opposition, as in Tables 6–7. The suffixes shown with parenthetical o occur with
this vowel except word-finally after a vowel, thus is ‘bull’, is-χo, is-χo-r, but besuro
‘fish’, besuro-χ, besuro-χo-r (see also Comrie & Polinsky 1998).

Table 6
Tsez Local Cases (Non-Distal)

10

ESS
LAT
ABL
VERS

IN
-a:
-a:-r
-a:j
-a:ʁor
‘in (a hollow obj)’
CONT
-ɬ
-ɬ-er
-ɬ-a:j
-ɬ-χor
‘in (a mass), among’
SUPER
-ƛ’(o) -ƛ’o-r -ƛ’-a:j -ƛ’-a:ʁor, -ƛ’-a:-r ‘on (horizontal)’
SUB
-ƛ
-ƛ-er
-ƛ-a:j
-ƛ-χor
‘under’
AD
-χ(o)
-χo-r
-χ-a:j
-χ-a:ʁor, -χ-a:-r
‘at’
APUD
-de
-de-r
-d-a:j
-d-a:ʁor, -d-a:-r
‘near’
POSS
-q(o)
-qo-r
-q-a:j
-q-a:ʁor, -q-a:-r
‘on (vertical)’

‘at’
‘to’
‘from’ ‘towards’

Table 7
Tsez Local Cases (Distal)

ESS
LAT
ABL
‘behind’
IN
-a:z
-a:z-a-r
-a:z-aj
-a:z-a
CONT
-ɬ-a:z
-ɬ-a:z-a-r
-ɬ-a:z-aj
-ɬ-a:z-a
SUPER
-ƛ’-a:z -ƛ’-a:z-a-r -ƛ’-a:z-aj -ƛ’-a:z-a
SUB
-ƛ-a:z
-ƛ-a:z-a-r
-ƛ-a:z-aj
-ƛ-a:z-a
AD
-χ-a:z
-χ-a:z-a-r
-χ-a:z-aj
-χ-a:z-a
APUD
-d-a:z
-d-a:z-a-r
-d-a:z-aj
-d-a:z-a
POSS
-q-a:z
-q-a:z-a-r
-q-a:z-aj
-q-a:z-a

Some Tsez nouns, which might be referred to as “spatial nouns”, have intrinsic
localization without an overt suffix, e.g. elo ‘there’, idu ‘home; at home’, neširu
‘evening; in the evening’. Directional suffixes are attached directly to such nouns, e.g.
el-a:j ‘from there’, idu-r ‘(to) home’, neširu-r ‘until evening’. Some local toponyms are
spatial nouns, e.g. newo ‘Mokok; in Mokok’, while others have an inbuilt localization
suffix, e.g. asa-q ‘Asakh, in Asakh’, with the possessive suffix -q.

3.2.3. Derivation of nouns

Tsez has a number of suffixes that derive nouns from other word classes:

-qu added to oblique stems forms agent nouns and names designating containers:
magala-qu ‘baker’; boc’-a-qu ‘wolf-trap’ (where -a is the plural suffix). For agent
nouns, this suffix alternates with the less productive suffix -qan borrowed from Avar:
qido-qu/qido-qan ‘mason’.

11

-k’u forms names of instruments or evaluative names of persons, usually from
the durative verb stem (see 3.6.6): ˁuƛ’no-k’u ‘coward’ (-ˁuƛ’- ‘be afraid’), ˁija-k’u
‘cryer’ (ˁijad- ‘cry, weep’).

The suffix -ɬi forms abstract nouns from the singular absolutive of nouns
denoting people, e.g. laʁ-ɬi ‘slavery’ (laʁ ‘slave’), učitel-ɬi ‘teaching’ (as occupation;
učitel ‘teacher’, from Russian). More typically, -ɬi is added to adjectives: bercin-ɬi
‘beauty’ (bercinaw ‘beautiful’; note the truncation). If the adjective changes for gender,
the gender IV form is used: r-ig(u)-ɬi ‘grace, kindness’ (-igu ‘good’; truncation of the
stem-final vowel is preferred in the Asakh dialect). For -ɬi nominalizing clauses, see
section 0.

The non-productive derivational suffix -ni forms abstract nouns from verb stems
as well as onomatopoetic nouns: reč’-ni ‘sharpness’ (-eč’- ‘cut’). (See section 3.6.4 for
the role of -ni in forming the masdar.)

-q’oj/-qoj/-ħoj (dialectal variants -q’ow, -q’u) derives the word for an enveloping
object from a singular oblique noun stem: reƛ’i-qoj ‘glove’ (reƛ’a ‘hand’).

-bi/-zi attaches to place names, deriving names of residents: newo-bi/newo-zi
‘residents of Mokok’.

-jo added to the lative singular derives nouns with the general meaning
‘possessing X’: kot’u-r-jo ‘bearded man’ (kot’u ‘beard’).

Examples of compound nouns include: eni-obij (variant eni-obu) ‘parents
(mother-father)’, ħot’o-č’el ‘stirrup (foot-place)’, rigu-žuka ‘anything (good-bad)’. Only
the last member of the compound noun inflects. If one of the compound elements
belongs to gender I singular, the compound is assigned to gender I plural (e. g. eni-obij),
otherwise to gender non-I plural.

Compounding sometimes involves truncation of the final segment: ƛ’iri-ku
‘shawl’ (ƛ’iri ‘above’, kur- ‘throw’), and can co-occur with suffixation: debi-dej-ɬi
‘quarrel, dividing up (your-my-NMLZ)’.

3.3.
Adjectives

3.3.1. Adjective inflection

True adjectives in Tsez show no case morphology when used attributively or
predicatively, but do have a plural suffix -t’a, in addition to which some adjectives
beginning with a vowel take gender prefixes, e.g. -eχora ‘long’. Adjectives used
independently (i.e. without a head) decline as nouns, with slight differences in stem
formation.

In addition, Tsez forms translation equivalents of adjectives by means of the
genitive suffix -s, oblique -z, and the linker -si, oblique -zo (see section 0 on case

12
concord). The genitive suffix is attached to noun stems, e.g. ger-es beɬaj (iron-GEN1
dagger) ‘iron dagger’; the attributive suffix is attached to other items, such as oblique
case forms of nouns, as in ˁaƛ-a:-si χalq’i (village-IN.ESS-LNK1 people) ‘people [living]
in the village’ (see also 4.1), and certain verbal forms, e.g. eχʷ-a:-si uži ‘dead boy’,
where eχʷ-a:-si is the resultative participle of -eχu- ‘die’ (section 3.6.4).

3.3.2. Derivation of adjectives

Two suffixes, -šaj and -χu, form adjectives with the meaning
‘containing/possessing X’ from an oblique nominal stem. -šaj implies that the contained
object is inseparable or inalienable: čakarjo-šaj čaj ‘sweet (lit. sugar-containing) tea’; -
χu implies that the contained object is separable, e.g. cijo-χu raƛ’ ‘soil with crystals of
salt’; but in modern Tsez this semantic difference is becoming obscured, e.g. q’ot’ur-za-
χu ged and q’ot’ur-za-šaj ged ‘shirt with buttons’.

-taj is the caritive suffix (‘lacking X’), deriving adjectives from an oblique
nominal stem: cijo-taj ‘unsalted’.

-mu derives adjectives from a singular absolutive noun: borjo-mu ‘sickly’ (borjo
‘sore, wound’), from other adjectives: at’i-mu ‘unripe’ (at’ij ‘wet’), and from verbs:
šakarja-mu ‘jealous’ (šakarjad- ‘be jealous’).

An example of a compound adjective is niga-c’uda ‘bruised (green-red)’.

3.4.
Pronouns

Morphologically, Tsez has distinct classes of personal pronouns (first and second
person only — third person pronouns are expressed as demonstratives, že ‘he, she, it’,
žedi ‘they’), demonstrative pronouns, and interrogative pronouns.

The first and second person singular pronouns are unusual in having a single
form for both absolutive and ergative: di ‘I’, mi ‘you’. The oblique stem of ‘I’ is da:-,
and that of ‘you’ is debe- before a syllable-final consonant (e.g. lative debe-r), dow-
before a syllable-initial consonant (e.g. apud.essive dow-de). Both pronouns have
irregular genitive 1: dej ‘my’, debi ‘your’ (the genitive 2 is regular: da:-z, debe-z).

The first and second person plural pronouns eli ‘we’, meži ‘you-all’ have the
regular absolutive versus ergative distinction; they also make a gender distinction in
oblique cases, with stems I elu-, mežu-, II-IV ela-, meža-. In addition to the regular
genitives elu-s, ela-s, elu-z, ela-z, mežu-s, mežu-z, meža-s, meža-z, they also have
special forms genitive 1 eli, meži, genitive 2 eli-z, meži-z, used where the possessor is a
close group, typically a family; compare eli enij ‘our mother’ with elu-s ˁaƛ ‘our
village’. These same special genitive forms are also found with the demonstrative žedi
in the meaning ‘they’: genitive 1 žedi, genitive 2 žedi-z for a close group possessor,
genitive 1 žedu-s, žeda-s, genitive 2 žedu-z, žeda-z for all other possessors.

13

The demonstrative pronouns make a gender distinction I versus II-IV in the
oblique forms, the proximal demonstratives also in the absolutive singular. The gender
distinction is obligatory in the oblique singular, but generalization of the gender I form,
to varying degrees, is found in the absolutive singular of the proximal demonstrative
and in the oblique plural. The oblique forms given below are used attributively, and also
serve as a base to which other case suffixes can be attached in independent use. The
base forms of the proximal demonstrative, which occurs only prefixed, are singular
absolutive I -da, II-IV -du, oblique I -si, II-IV -ɬa (which may optionally be reduced to -
ɬ word-finally after a vowel), plural absolutive -ziri, oblique I -zi, II-IV -za. The
prefixed forms are je-da (with ji- rather than je- except in the singular absolutive), ej-da,
and how-da. The base forms of the distal demonstrative, which can occur in isolation,
are singular absolutive že, oblique I nesi, II-IV neɬo, neɬ, plural absolutive žedi, oblique
I žedu, II-IV žeda. The prefixed forms are el-že (with irregular singular oblique forms I
enesi, II-IV eneɬ(o)) and how-že (with irregular singular oblique forms I hemesi, II-IV
hemeɬ(o)).

The interrogative pronouns make no distinction of humanness in the absolutive
(šebi ‘who, what’), but have distinct oblique stems ɬa:- ‘who’, ɬina- ‘what’. The human
interrogative pronoun has an irregular ergative ɬu, while the nonhuman one has
regularly ɬin-a:.

3.5.
Numerals

Used attributively, numerals distinguish a nominative and an oblique form.
When used nonattributively, the oblique form serves as a stem to which case suffixes
are attached. (In addition, there are specifically gender I oblique forms with final -e
rather than -a, but the forms in -a can also be used with gender I nouns.) The simple
numerals are given in Table 8. ‘100’ has an alternative form bišom, which is preferred
before -no in compound numerals.

Table 8
Tsez Simple Numerals

Absolutive
Oblique
1
sis
sida
2
q’ˁano
q’ˁuna
3
ɬˁono
ɬˁora
4
ujno
ujra
5
ɬeno
ɬera
6
iɬno
iɬɬira

14
7
ˁoƛno
ˁoƛƛora
8
biƛno
biƛƛira
9
oč’č’ino
oč’č’ira
10
oc’c’ino
oc’c’ira
20
qu
qura
100
bišon
bišonra
1000 ˁazar
ˁazarra

There are two ways of forming the teens. The first has the structure oc’c’ino
followed by the unit, e.g. oc’c’ino sis ‘11’; its oblique form is oc’c’ira sida, while in
nonattributive use only the last component is further declined, e.g. lative oc’c’ira sida-r.
The second method uses the unit in modified form with the suffix -oc’i; oblique -oc’ira;
the forms are set out in Table 9. The second method is not found in all dialects, but is
the preferred variant in the Asakh dialect.

Table 9
Tsez Teens (Second Formation)

11
sij-oc’i
12
q’ˁaj-oc’i
13
ɬˁoj-oc’i
14
uw-oc’i
15
ɬew-oc’i
16
iɬ-oc’i
17
ˁoƛ-oc’i
18
biƛ-oc’i
19
eč’-oc’i

The Tsez numeral system from 20 to 99 is vigesimal, the relevant products of 20
being: q’ˁano-qu ‘40’, ɬˁono-qu ‘60’, ujno-qu ‘80’; the oblique forms simply add -ra.
The higher hundreds and thousands are expressed as ‘two hundred’, etc. The thousands,
hundreds, twenties, and numerals below 20 are combined, from higher to lower, each
element linked to the following by -no, e.g. q’ˁano bišom-no ɬˁono-qu-no oc’c’ino iɬno
‘276’.

3.6.
Verbs

3.6.1. Overview

15

Tsez verbs fall into four morphological groups according to the final segment of
the stem. The first group consists of all verbs with stems ending in a consonant (other
than those in the fourth group); such stems are invariable. The second group consists of
all verbs with stems ending in -i; the final vowel drops before another vowel. The third
group consists of all verbs with stems ending in -u; here the final vowel drops before
another vowel but labializes the preceding consonant (except in the Mokok dialect,
which lacks labialization). The fourth group consists of all verbs with variant stems
ending in -d/-j; in general, the variant in -d occurs before a vowel (e.g. infinitive -
eχʷad-a ‘slaughter’), the variant in -j elsewhere (e.g. present -eχʷaj-χo, future indefinite
-eχʷa:j, causative -eχʷaj-r-, with the j remaining before an inserted vowel, e.g. causative
present -eχʷaj-ir-χo). (In other dialects, short verbs in -d/-j have a stem in -di as an
alterative to -j.) The only truly irregular verb is ‘to be’, which has suppletive stems joɬ
(present), a:nu (present negative), zow- (past, e.g. past unwitnessed zow-no, past
witnessed zow-si); several forms of the paradigm are missing, and are replaced by
forms of -iči- ‘be located’ or -oq- ‘stay; become’.

3.6.2. Tense-Mood-Aspect-Evidentiality

Tsez has five simple indicative tense-aspect forms: past unwitnessed -n(o), past
witnessed -s(i), present -χ(o), future definite -an, future indefinite -Ø but with vowel
lengthening, e.g. -iš- ‘eat’, -iš-no, -iš-si, -iš-χo, -iš-an, -a:š; -esu- ‘find’, -esu-n, -esu-s, -
esu-χ, -esʷ-an, -a:su. The past witnessed has a special form used in content questions,
with the suffix -a:, e.g. -iš-a:, -esʷ-a:; other tense-aspects use their ordinary forms in
content questions. In polarity questions, -a: is added to the finite verb form (e.g. present
-ik’i-χ-a:), but again the past witnessed is exceptional, taking a special suffix -ija: (after
consonants), -ja: (after vowels), e.g. -iš-ija:, -esu-ja:. The future forms have an almost
complementary distribution across persons: the definite is used with first person, the
indefinite is used with second and third.

In addition, there are periphrastic forms, a selection of which are presented here.
The combination of the infinitive with the present tense of ‘be’ gives emphatic future,
e.g. -ik’-a joɬ ‘shall go’. The progressive uses the imperfective converb and the
appropriate tense-aspect of the auxiliary ‘be’, e.g. -ik’i-χ zow-si ‘was going’. The
completive uses the perfective gerund and the auxiliary ‘be’, e.g. -ik’i-n zow-si ‘had
gone’. The perfect uses the resultative participle and the auxiliary ‘be’, e.g. -ik’-a:si
zow-si ‘had gone’. The present participle with the auxiliary ‘be’ gives an intentive, e.g.
-ik’i-χo-si zow-si ‘intended to go’. Resultatives use the imperfective or perfective
gerund plus the resultative participle of -iči- ‘be located’ and the auxiliary ‘be’, e.g. -
ik’i-n -ič-a:-si zow-si ‘was gone’; -ik’i-χ -ič-a:-si zow-si ‘was in the state of being on
his way hence’.

16

The second-person imperative has a zero suffix for intransitive verbs and for
derived transitive verbs, e.g. -ik’i ‘go!’, aj-ir ‘bring!’ (causative of aj- ‘come’), the
suffix -o for simple transitive verbs, e.g. kur-o ‘throw!’, though there are a few
anomalous formations. The optative is formed from the imperative with a final -ƛ, e.g.
kur-o-ƛ ‘let him throw’ (see also 4.3.3).

3.6.3 Negation

Negation is expressed basically by a suffix -č’V, though with several
idiosyncrasies, different in different dialects. Using the stem -ik’i- ‘go’, the forms are
past unwitnessed -ik’i-č’ej, past witnessed -ik’i-č’u-s (also: -ik’i-č’u, with no tense
suffix), present -ik’i-χ-a:nu (cf. a:nu, the suppletive negative of present joɬ ‘be’), future
definite -ik’-a:-č’i-n, future indefinite -a:k’i-č’i. The negative finite past unwitnessed
form -ik’i-č’ej, identical to the negative perfective converb, is, incidentally,
characteristic of the Asakh dialect; most other dialects have a form like Mokok -ik’i-n-
a:nu, paralleling the negative present.

Prohibition is expressed by the portmanteau suffix -no with vowel lengthening,
e.g. -a:š-no ‘don't eat!’, with addition of -ƛ for the negative optative: -a:š-no-ƛ ‘let him
not eat!’

3.6.4. Nonfinite Forms

Participles form a unified class in terms of their external syntax, but not in terms
of their internal structure. The past participle in -ru (with vowel lengthening) behaves
like an adjective, and is thus invariable except for gender agreement, e.g. -a:š-ru ‘having
eaten’; its negative has the suffix -č’i before the past participle suffix, e.g. -a:š-č’i-ru
‘not having eaten’. The resultative participle in -a:-si (e.g. -esʷ-a:-si ‘in the state of
having found’) and the present participle in -χo-si (e.g. -esu-χo-si ‘finding’) contain the
attributive suffix -si, and thus have oblique forms in -a:-zo, -χo-zo. The present
participle negates as expected, with addition of -si to the negative present (e.g. -ik’i-χ-
a:nu-si ‘not going’), but the negative resultative participle is a portmanteau adjective
form in -ani (e.g. -ik’-ani ‘in the state of not having gone’).

Tsez has a rich set of converbs (gerunds, verbal adverbs), and the following list,
illustrated by -ik’i- ‘go’, is not exhaustive. Converbs derive from the verb stem,
sometimes with vowel lengthening, sometimes with the help of a locational series
marker, which is sometimes preceded by the suffix -za-, sometimes with the help of
some other suffix not found elsewhere in Tsez morphology. Converbs used for
expressing temporal relations are set out in Table 10.

Table 10

17
Temporal converbs

Relationship between the
Form
Additional
action expressed by the main

characteristics
verb (M) and by the converb (C)

C and M are simultaneous
ik’i-χ
manner of action

ik’i-ƛ’
punctual

ik’i-ƛ’orej
simple simultaneous

ik’i-zej
simple simultaneous

C precedes M
ik’i-n
manner of action

ik’i-nosi
simple anterior

a:k’i-run
immediate anterior

C follows M
ik’i-zaƛ’or
simple posterior

ik’-a-ce
terminative

The perfective (completive) and imperfective (durative) converbs are identical in form
to the past unwitnessed and present respectively. Other converbs are locative (-a:k’i-z-
a:), causal (e.g. -ik’i-χoj, -ik’i-za-ƛ’, -ik’i-za-q), conditional (-ik’i-na:j, -ik’i-ɬi),
concessive (-ik’i-ɬin). See also 4.4.3.

The infinitive takes the suffix -a, e.g. -iš-a ‘to eat’, -ik’-a ‘to go’. A verbal noun
(masdar) has the suffix -(a)ni, e.g. -iš-ani ‘eating’, reč’-ni ‘cutting’ and is always of
gender IV.

3.6.5. Potential and Causative Forms

Two derived forms are sufficiently productive to be considered part of the
paradigm, the potential in -ɬ and the causative in -r, e.g. from -iš- ‘eat’ potential -iš-eɬ-
(before a vowel, -iš-ɬ-), causative -iš-er- (before a vowel, -iš-r-).

3.6.6. Derivation of verbs

-k’- derives transitive verbs from qualitative adjectives (at’i-k’- ‘dampen, soak’,
cf. atij ‘wet’) and adverbs (bito-k’- ‘move’, cf. bittaj ‘over there’).

-ɬ- and -χ- derive intransitive verbs from a similar group of qualitative adjectives
and adverbs: at’i-ɬ- ‘become wet’, ade-χ- ‘move forward’ (cf. ada:j ‘in front’).

For causative and potential derivatives, see section 3.6.5. Some morphological
causatives are lexicalized, e.g. -egi-r- ‘send’, cf. -egi- ‘fade; tear oneself away’).

18

Tsez forms durative (habitual-iterative) verbs with the suffixes -nod, -nad, -anad;
the choice of suffix is lexicalized, and may vary dialectally. Examples are -ˁuƛ’- ‘fear’,
-ˁuƛ’-nod- ‘fear habitually’, kur- ‘throw’, kur-nod- ‘be engaged in throwing’. Such
derivatives of transitive verbs may either remain transitive, or become intransitive
taking the erstwhile agent as sole core argument — this is the only known instance of
verb lability in Tsez.

Examples of compound verbs include: -ik’i-neχ- ‘go back and forth (go-come)’,
t’it’i-eč’- ‘hash (tear-cut)’. If a verb inflects for gender in isolation, it does so too as a
component of a compound verb.

A highly productive way of forming new verbs is by combining a lexical item
with a light verb, typically -oq- ‘stay, become’ for intransitive verbs and -od- ‘do’ for
transitive verbs. The notional component is often borrowed from or via Avar
(infinitives, masdars, adjectives and nouns) or Russian (infinitives and nouns). For
example: t’amizi -od- ‘cause’ (Avar t’amize ‘to force’), woržizi -oq- ‘fly’ (Avar -oržize
‘to fly’; the Avar gender prefix has been fossilized in Tsez), χabar b-od- ‘talk’ (Arabic
via Avar χabar ‘story’), bercin -oq- ‘be decorated’ (Avar bercinaw ‘beautiful’), razwod
b-od- ‘divorce’ (Russian razvod ‘divorce’), paradat -od- ‘sell’ (Russian prodat´ ‘to
sell’). Some compounds containing a nominal component have a fixed gender prefix,
usually gender III (but note sapu j-od- ‘destroy’, gender II).

Besides regular combinations, whose semantics is quite transparent, Tsez has a
few lexicalized idioms with other verbs, e.g. rok’-ƛ’o-r -aj- ‘remember (heart-SUPER-
LAT arrive)’, rok’u r-eχu- ‘feel pity (heart die)’. The verb riƛu r-iƛ- ‘plough
(ploughing_field plough)’ includes a cognate object.

3.7.
Adverbs

Tsez has few simple adverbs, i.e. that are neither synchronically nor plausibly
diachronically derived, e.g. ƛ’iri ‘above’, ži ‘now’, dahaw ‘a little’ (a loan from Avar).
At most a couple of simple vowel-initial adverbs take agreement prefixes, e.g. -ˁaƛo
‘quickly’. Many adverbs are spatial case forms of nouns or of stems not occurring in
isolation, e.g. χeχɬi-ƛ’ ‘quickly’, the super.essive of χeχɬi ‘speed’; žaqˁuɬ ‘today’, i.e.
ža-qˁu-ɬ ‘that-day-CONT’; ade-r ‘forwards’, with the lative suffix attached to a stem also
found in the verb ade-χ- ‘advance’. Spatial nouns (3.2.2) stand at the border-line
between nouns and adverbs. Adverbs of manner are often converbs, e.g. qˁaƛin ‘aloud’,
i.e. qˁaƛi-n shout-IPFVCVB, or truncated forms of adjectives with an invariable gender
prefix, e.g. rig ‘well’, cf. -igu ‘good’.

An example of a compound adverb is taqqo-naqqo ‘back and forth (on that side-
on this side)’.

19
3.8.
Postpositions

Many Tsez postpositions also function as adverbs, e.g. igo ‘near’, and it is
questionable whether the adverb/postposition distinction is justified here. However,
there are some clear instances of postpositions, e.g. ˁolo ‘because of’, -iɬe ‘as, like’, the
latter requiring a gender prefix.

3.9.
Minor classes

Tsez has a rich set of particles, most of them occurring as clitics and expressing
various communicative functions. For example, the particle -tow is used for general
emphasis and -kin is used for focusing; the particle -gon marks a contrastively
topicalized constituent. Two clitics, -ƛin and -ƛaχ, are used to mark finite complements,
mainly representing reported speech (see section 0). Free particles include hudu ‘yes’,
a:j ‘no’, and -uj ‘well (then)’, the only vowel-initial particle to take a gender prefix.

Tsez has few conjunctions appearing as separate words, although there are
coordinating conjunctions ja ‘or’ and amma ‘but’ (section 4.7).

4.
Syntax

4.1.
Noun phrase and postpositional phrase

A noun phrase can be represented by a noun with modifiers, or a pronoun, or a
substantivized expression. Substantivized expressions include participles with the
nominalizing suffix -ɬi, masdars, and substantivized restrictive adjectives, which all
inflect for case:

(1) ič’č’a j-eže-ni-r
ˁomoj
teƛ-no.

INTNS II-older-RESTR-LAT donkey.ABS give-PSTUNW

‘(They) gave the donkey to the oldest one [of the girls].’

Dependent elements precede the head noun. The neutral order of preposed
modifiers is as follows: (i) relative clause, (ii) unemphatic possessive pronoun, (iii)
emphatic possessive pronoun, (iv) restrictive adjective, (v) demonstrative, (vi)
numeral/quantifier, (vii) non-restrictive adjective, though the order of (iv), (v), and (vi)
can vary:

(2) [sideni
ˁaƛ-a:
b-iči-χosi]

another village-IN.ESS IPL-be-PRSPTCP

20
nesi-s
b-aq’ˁu
žuka-t’a-ni
ˁagarɬi
he-GEN1 1PL-many bad-DISTR-RESTR relative
‘his many unpleasant relatives who live in the next village’

In addition, oblique noun phrases can appear as modifiers if they take the linker
-si (-zo if the head noun is in an oblique case):

(3) a. ħon-ƛ’o-si
ˁadala

hill-SUPER.ESS-LNK1 fool.ABS

‘the fool on the hill’
b. ħon-ƛ’o-zo
ˁadala-r

hill-SUPER.ESS-LNK2 fool-LAT

‘to the fool on the hill’

Modifying nominals typically precede other adjectives.

Adpositional phrases are always head-final. Tsez has a number of postpositions,
for example, ada:z/ada:j ‘in front, ahead, before (location in space or time)’, ˤolo
‘because of’, soder ‘after, following’, χiza:z/χiza:j ‘after, behind (location in space or
time)’, etc. (see also 0). The boundary between postpositions and adverbs is not always
clear. Additionally, the spatial suffixes on nouns (see section 0) may be analyzed as
postpositions rather than case affixes.

4.2.
Clause structure

4.2.1. Word order

Tsez is consistently head-final: it uses postpositions, prenominal relative clauses,
adjectives, genitives, and numerals, and places dependent clauses before main clauses.
In clauses with several nominals, the neutral order is (i) Agent (Experiencer), (ii)
Recipient (Addressee, Goal, Beneficiary), (iii) Patient, (iv) Locative, (v) Instrument; the
order of locative and instrumental can vary. Despite the strong head-final features, the
position of the predicate is often clause-medial. Such word order is common in
everyday speech and seems to be increasing, possibly under the influence of Russian.

4.2.2. Case alignment and valency changes

Tsez is morphologically ergative. All intransitive verbs take an absolutive
subject, although this fact may be obscured by argument drop and by the low type
frequency of absolutive agreement, which is only visible on a subset of verbs and
predicative complements. Transitive (including ditransitive) verbs take an ergative and

21
absolutive argument. A subset of two-place verbs, mostly verbs of cognition and
perception, take a lative experiencer and absolutive stimulus.

4.2.3. Gender agreement and cross-reference

Within noun phrases, certain modifiers agree with the head noun in gender and
number. Within clausal syntax, the predicate and some adverbs agree with the
absolutive noun phrase in gender and number, regardless of the transitivity of a clause.
Agreement is marked by gender prefixes (see 0) which combine only with a subset of
vowel-initial adjectives, adverbs, and verbs. Agreeing adjectives, adverbs, and verbs
make up only a small proportion of total adjectives, adverbs and verbs in Xalilov
(1999), but they are highly frequent (Gagliardi & Lidz 2014: 68). As a result, agreement
is very frequent in the language system and is highly visible to a child language learner.

If several absolutives are linked by -n(o) ‘and’, then if at least one of the
nominals belongs to gender I singular, the agreement is gender I plural, otherwise, it is
gender non-I plural (the same agreement principle is observed with compound nouns):

(4) a. kid-no
uži-n
b-aj-si.

girl.ABS-and boy.ABS-and IPL-come-PSTWIT

‘A boy and a girl arrived.’
b. kid-no
meši-n
r-aj-si.

girl.ABS-and calf.ABS-and nIPL-come-PSTWIT

‘A girl and a calf arrived.’

Tsez also has long-distance agreement, whereby the absolutive argument in an
embedded clause which is itself in the absolutive argument position determines
agreement on the predicate of the clause immediately above it. For example, in 0 the
matrix verb -ikʷad- ‘see’ agrees with the absolutive noun phrase elus ʁwˤay ‘your dog’
contained in the embedded nominalized clause (that clause is shown in brackets):

(5) da:r
[elu-s
ʁwˤaj
k’et’u-za-ɬ
χiza:j

me-LAT we-GEN1 dog(III) cat-PL.OBL-CONT.ESS
behind

k’āɬi-ru-łi]
b-ikʷaj-si.
run-PSTPTCP-NMLZ III-see-PSTWIT

‘I saw how our dog was chasing cats (lit. ran behind cats).’

Long-distance agreement can alternate with local agreement; the choice between long-
distance agreement and local agreement is determined by the information-structural

22
status of the absolutive noun phrase that triggers agreement. In Tsez, long-distance
agreement occurs when the absolutive noun phrase is interpreted as topic, thus encoding
this topicality (Polinsky & Potsdam 2001).

4.3.
Major Sentence Types

4.3.1. Declarative clauses
It is common to find impersonal constructions with meteorological verbs, which
are often taken cross-linguistically to be avalent. However, meteorological descriptions
in Tsez allow for the introduction of the absolutive argument ʁudi ‘day’ (gender IV) or
hawa-baq’ ‘weather (lit. air-sun)’ (gender IV), and if a meteorological predicate can
manifest agreement, it registers agreement in gender IV regardless of the presence of an
overt absolutive argument. Consider the following examples, where 0 shows overt
agreement and 0 does not:

(6) a. ʁudi
r-oč’ow joł.

day(IV).ABS IV-cold be.PRS

‘It is cold.’
b. ʁudi
tatanu joł.

day.ABS.IV warm be.PRS

‘It is warm.’

One-place verbs form intransitive clauses, with the argument in the absolutive case,
irrespective of volitionality:

(7) is
b-eχu-s.

bull.ABS III-die-PSTWIT

‘The bull died.’

(8) ečru žek’u
qoqoƛi-s.

old
man.ABS laugh-PSTWIT

‘The old man laughed.’

In the ergative clause, the agent is in the ergative case, and the patient is in the
absolutive:

(9) žek’-a:
gulu
žek’-si.

man-ERG horse.ABS hit-PSTWIT

23

‘The man hit the horse.’

Both the ergative and the absolutive noun phrases can be omitted if they are recoverable
from the context; in other words, Tsez is a pro-drop language, with pro-drop affecting
both subjects and objects.

A number of verbs describing physical contact take the instrument in the
absolutive and the patient in an oblique case. If the patient is animate, it appears in the
genitive 2, being linked to the recoverable body-part nominal in a spatial case:

(10) žek’-a:
gulu-z
(gugjo-ƛ’)
čuret’
b-ok’-si.

man-ERG horse-GEN2 back-SUPER.ESS whip.ABS III-hit-PSTWIT

‘The man whipped the horse (lit.: hit the whip (on) the horse’s (back)).’

Ditransitive verbs take the agent in the ergative, the patient in the absolutive, and
the recipient in the lative if the transfer of possession/information is permanent, but in a
locative case if the transfer is temporary or incomplete:

(11) a. ˁal-a:
kid-b-er
surat
teƛ-si.

Ali-ERG girl-OS-LAT picture.ABS give-PSTWIT

‘Ali gave the girl a picture (for good, e.g. as a gift).’
b. ˁal-a:
kid-be-q-or
surat
teƛ-si.

Ali-ERG girl-OS-POSS-LAT picture.ABS give-PSTWIT

‘Ali lent the girl a picture.’

The causative suffix -r- derives transitive verbs from intransitive or affective
verbs, and ditransitive verbs from transitive verbs; in the latter, the causee appears in
the poss.essive case.

(12) obij-a:
kid
j-oχi-r-si.

father-ERG girl.ABS II-run-CAUS-PSTWIT

‘The father made the girl run.’

(13) aħ-a:
meši
b-esu-r-si.

shepherd-ERG calf.ABS III-find-CAUS-PSTWIT

‘The shepherd found the calf.’

(14) aħ-a:
čanaq’an-qo
zej
žek’-er-si.

shepherd-ERG hunter-POSS.ESS bear.ABS hit-CAUS-PSTWIT

24

‘The shepherd made the hunter hit the bear.’

The affective clause has a perception verb or a psychological verb as predicate;
the experiencer is in the lative case and the stimulus in the absolutive:

(15) aħo-r
meši
b-esu-s.

shepherd-LAT calf.ABS III-find-PSTWIT

‘The shepherd found the calf.’

The potential clause is used with the potential form of a transitive verb (potential
forms of intransitive verbs retain a single argument in the absolutive):

(16) k’et’u-q
ʁˁaj
ħaƛu-ɬ-χo.

cat-POSS.ESS milk.ABS drink-POT-PRS

‘The cat can drink (the) milk.’

Lexically intransitive verbs can occur in a similar construction, with the patient
in the absolutive and the agent in the poss.essive, with the meaning of an involuntary
action:

(17) uži-q
č’ikaj
j-eχu-s.

boy-POSS.ESS glass(II).ABS II-break(intr)-PSTWIT

‘The boy accidentally broke the glass.’

The biabsolutive construction occurs with two types of analytical verbal
predicates: the participial predicate expressing durative action and the transitive subject
resultative. The durative predicate can occur in the ergative or in the biabsolutive
construction:

(18) už-a:/uži
t’ek
t’et’er-χo
zow-si.

boy-ERG/.ABS book.ABS read-IPFVCVB be-PSTWIT

‘The boy was reading a book.’

The transitive subject resultative expresses the state of the subject resulting from the
respective action, and can occur only in the biabsolutive construction. It can be formed
only from those transitives which can form an ergative clause and then exclusively from
those which express an action with observable consequences:

25
(19) uži/*už-a:
žin
t’ek
t’et’er-χo
Ø-ič-a:si joɬ.

boy.ABS/-ERG still book.ABS read-IPFVCVB I-be-RES be.PRS

‘The boy is still engaged in reading a book.’

For a detailed analysis of Tsez biabsolutives, see Gagliardi et al. (2014).

4.3.2. Interrogative clauses

Yes-no questions are marked by the interrogative suffix -(j)a: which is added to
the constituent which is the focus of the question (see also 0). The focused constituent
usually remains in situ.

(20) a. k’et’u
ʁˁutk-a:
joɬ-a:?

cat.ABS house-IN.ESS be.PRS-Q

‘Is the cat in the house?’
b. k’et’u-ja: ʁˁutk-a: joɬ?

‘Is it the cat that is in the house?’
c. k’et’u ʁˁutk-a:-ja: joɬ?

‘Is it in the house that the cat is?’

In content questions, the position of a wh-word depends on whether it is
replacing an argument or an adjunct. The fronting of a wh-word is obligatory or
strongly preferred for adjuncts but rather uncommon for arguments. In those cases when
an argument wh-word is fronted, it receives a restricted, discourse-linked interpretation,
compare 0 and 0:

(21) a. neti
obij
kidir-a:-ʁor
Ø-ik’i-χ?

when father.ABS Kidero-IN-VERS I-go-PRS

b. ??obij
kidir-a:-ʁor
neti
Ø-ik’i-χ?

father.ABS Kidero-IN-VERS when I-go-PRS

‘When is father leaving for Kidero?’

(22) a. kid-b-a:
šebi
t’et’er-χo?

girl-OS-ERG what.ABS read-PRS

‘What is the girl reading?’
b. šebi kid-b-a: t’et’er-χo?

‘Which thing is the girl reading?’

26

Multiple Wh-questions are rare, and the order of wh-words is fixed. Most likely
such multiple wh-word clusters are set phrases which cannot be expanded. For example,
0 is possible but none of the combinations in 0 are allowed:

(23) a. ɬu
šebi
r-oj-χo?

who.ERG what.ABS IV-do-PRS

b. *šebi ɬu r-oj-χo?

‘Who is doing what?’

(24) a. *kid-b-a:
šebi
neti
r-oj-χo?

girl-OS-ERG what.ABS when
IV-do-PRS

b. *šebi neti kid-b-a: r-oj-χo?

‘When is the girl doing what?’

In questions, the verb appears in the declarative form in all tenses except the past
witnessed affirmative, where special forms are used (see 0).

4.3.3. Imperatives and optatives

Direct commands are expressed by the imperative and prohibitive forms of the
verb:

(25) ik’i/a:k’i-no.

go.IMP/go-PROH

‘Go./Don’t go.’

The optative, which is frequent in formulaic expressions, can express a command
directed to someone other than the addressee:

(26) debe-r
huni
r-egir-oƛ.

you-LAT road.ABS IV-send-OPT

‘Bon voyage (lit. may it send the road to you).’

4.3.4 Exclamatives

Dice ‘how much/many’ is the most common wh-expression used in
exclamatives, for example:

(27) Oh dice
di
akił-a:!

27

oh
how_much
1SG.ABS get.tired-PST.INTERR

‘Oh how tired I am!’

A common way of conveying the exclamative meaning is through the use of a non-
witnessed past tense predicate. In exclamative contexts, this tense form can be used to
comment on the event that is ongoing on at the moment of the utterance:

(28) Dice
Ø-eženi
obiy
ħarƛi-n!

how.much I-old
father(I).ABS snore-PSTUNW

‘Does father snore!’

4.4.
Complex sentences

4.4.1. Relative clauses

The predicate of a relative clause is a participle. Arguments and adjuncts are
accessible to relativization using the same participial form:

(29) a. už-a:
kid-b-er
gagali
teƛ-si/teƛ-χo.

boy-ERG girl-OS-LAT flower.ABS give-PSTWIT/give-PRS

‘The boy gave/gives a flower to the girl.’
b. kid-b-er
gagali
ta:ƛ-ru/teƛ-χosi
uži

girl-OS-LAT flower.ABS give-PSTPTCP/give-PRSPTCP boy

‘the boy who gave/gives a flower to the girl’
c. už-a:
gagali
ta:ƛ-ru/teƛ-χosi
kid

boy-ERG flower.ABS give-PSTPTCP/give-PRSPTCP girl

‘the girl to whom the boy gave/gives a flower’
d. už-a:
kid-b-er
ta:ƛ-ru/teƛ-χosi
gagali

boy-ERG girl-OS-LAT give-PSTPTCP/give-PRSPTCP flower

‘the flower that the boy gave/gives to the girl’
e. už-a:
kid-b-er
gagali
ta:ƛ-ru/teƛ-χosi
ʁudi

boy-ERG girl-OS-LAT flower.ABS give-PSTPTCP/give-PRSPTCP day

‘the day on which the boy gave/gives a flower to the girl’

Constituents of embedded clauses can also be relativized. Possessive phrases cannot be
relativized.

(30) ˁal-a:
r-od-a
bajbik
b-a:j-ru
ʁˁutku

Ali-ERG IV-do-INF beginning III-do-PSTPTCP house

28

‘the house that Ali began to build’

(31) *už-a:
ˁoƛ’
r-ecʷa:r-u
enij

boy-ERG spindle.ABS IV-break-PSTPRT mother

‘the mother whose spindle the boy broke’

In addition, Tsez has correlative clauses formed using wh-words and the interrogative
form of the verb (see 0). In the example below, the bracketed material is the correlative
and the demonstrative hemesi is its correlate in the related clause.

(32) [na:si
uži
ič’č’a ada:z Ø-aj-χo]

which boy(I).ABS most
first
I-come-PRS

hemes-a: aħi
b-od-o.
that-ERG
alarm.ABS III-do-IMPER
‘The boy who comes first is to sound the alarm (lit. which boy comes first, he is
to sound the alarm).’

Tsez correlative formation is quite free and is possible for all clausal constituents.

4.4.2. Complementation

Typically, the predicate of a complement clause is a participle, marked
optionally by the nominalizing suffix -ɬi. If such a complement clause is in the
absolutive position it determines verbal agreement in gender IV (as in (33)), or its own
absolutive argument can determine agreement by long-distance agreement (section 0).

(33) obi-r
uži-r
magalu
b-a:ti-ru-ɬi
r-ij-si

father-LAT boy-LAT bread(III).ABS III-want-PSTPTCP-NMLZ IV-know-PSTWIT

‘The father knew that the boy wanted bread.’

In addition to nominalized complement clauses, Tsez has finite-verb complements
marked by the enclitics -ƛin and -ƛaχ (section 0). These clitics function as
complementizers, heading finite clauses. Such clauses typically occur as complements
of propositional-attitude verbs, and in this context, first and second pronouns in the
complement clause can be interpreted as referring to the speech act participants or to the
attitude holder:

(34) irbahin-a:
[di ʕajibijaw
joł-ƛin]
eƛi-χ.

29

Ibrahim-ERG me wrong/foolish be.PRS-QUOT say-PRS

(i) ‘Ibrahim says that I was wrong.’ (speech-act-participant interpretation)

(ii) ‘Ibrahimi says that hei was wrong.’ (attitude-holder interpretation)

This pattern whereby the semantic value of a pronoun (indexical expression) can be
changed from being determined by the utterance context to being determined by the
context of the reported speech act is known as indexical shift. For details on indexical
shift in Tsez, see Polinsky (2015).

4.4.3. Adverbial clauses

Adverbial clauses with converbs are very common; on the formation of
converbs, see 0.
Examples of temporal adverbial clauses:

(35) buq b-aj-nosi
eli
ciqq-a:-ʁor
b-ik’i-s.

sun III-come-ANTCVB we.ABS forest-IN-VERS IPL-go-PSTWIT

‘When the sun rose we went to the forest.’

(36) is-χo
Øi rok’u-n
r-eχu-n

bull-AD.ESS
heart-and IV-die-PFVCVB

ˁomoj-a:i
neƛo-r
sis
ˁaq’lu
b-oj-no.
donkey-ERG 3SG.nI-LAT one advice.ABS III-do-PSTWIT

‘The donkey felt sorry for the bull and gave it a piece of advice.’

The arguments of the embedded and matrix clause need not be coreferential.

Example of a locative adverbial clause:

(37) enij-a:
magalu
χa:ci-za:-ʁor
uži
Ø-ik’i-s.

mother-ERG bread.ABS leave-LOCCVB-VERS boy.ABS I-go-PSTWIT

‘The boy went to the place where mother left the bread.’

Example of a causal adverbial clause:

(38) obij
Ø-aj-zaƛ’/-zaq
uži
ʁˁaʁˁu Ø-izi-s.

father.ABS I-come-CAUSCVB boy.ABS glad
I-become-PSTWIT

‘The boy was happy that/because the father had come.’

30
4.4.4. Other clause types

Infinitival clauses occur with modal verbs (e.g. -a:j ‘must’, koƛ’- ‘be able’),
phasal verbs (e.g. bajbik b-od- ‘begin’, -oq- ‘become’— often in the meaning ‘set to’),
verbs of motion, psychological verbs (e.g. -eti- ‘want’, -ˁuƛ’- ‘be afraid’), and with
t’amizi -od- ‘cause’. The ad.essive case of the masdar, expressing purpose more
strongly than the infinitive, can also be used with some of these verbs:

(39) a. da:-r
new-a:-ʁor
ujtow
ik’-a
r-eti-n.

me-LAT Mokok-IN-VERS just_so go-INF IV-want-PSTUNW

‘I wanted to go to Mokok just for the heck of it.’
b. da:-r
new-a:-ʁor
(*ujtow) ik’-ani-χ
r-eti-n.

me-LAT Mokok-IN-VERS just_so
go-MSD-AD.ESS IV-want-PSTUNW

‘I wanted to go to Mokok [on purpose].’

Four verbs: -oq- ‘begin’, -iħw
- ‘start, begin’, -ik’- ‘begin (lit.: go)’, and -ič- ‘continue’,
take infinitival complements exhibiting a pattern whereby the subject of the matrix verb
is coreferential to the subject of the infinitival complement, but only the latter can be
expressed. The matrix verb agrees with the silent subject in gender, which indicates that
the subject, although unexpressed, is in the absolutive case.

(40) a, [bełiqan-ä
kawu-bi
ser-a]
Ø-iħu-n/*r-iħu-n.

hunter-ERG gate(II)-PL.ABS unlock-INF I-begin-PSTUNW/IV- begin-PSTUNW

‘The hunter began to unlock the gates.’
b. *[kawu-bi
ser-a]
bełiqan
Ø-iħu-n.

gate(II)-PL.ABS unlock-INF hunter,ABS
I-begin-PSTUNW

This pattern, first noted in Kibrik (1981: 38–39), has become known as backward
control (see Fukuda (2008) for an overview of the phenomenon from a cross-linguistic
perspective and Polinsky & Potsdam (2002) for a detailed syntactic analysis of the Tsez
data).

Clauses with the masdar in the poss.essive case occur with psychological verbs:

(41) enij
sasaq
irbahin
aj-ani-q

mother.ABS tomorrow Ibrahim.ABS come-MSD-POSS.ESS

j-ˁuƛ’-no
j-ič-a:si
joɬ.
II-afraid-IPFVCVB II-be-RES be.PRS

31

‘The mother is afraid that Ibrahim will come tomorrow.’

4.5.
Negation

Sentential negation is expressed by negative forms of the verb (see 0). Multiple
negation is impossible. Constituent negation is expressed by the negative particle a:nu
following the negated constituent:

(42)
di
t’ek
ʁiʁi
a:nu t’et’er-χo.

me book.ABS slowly not
read-PRS

‘I am not reading slowly.’

4.6.
Comparative constructions

Tsez does not have an overt comparative morpheme meaning ‘more’ or ‘less’.
Comparatives of superiority are expressed by putting the standard of comparison in the
super.ablative form, which precedes the gradable adjective. Consider the following
example:

(43)
zarema-tow-ƛ’-a:j
bercinaw

Zarema-FOC-SUPER-ABL beautiful

‘more beautiful than even Zarema’

If the amount phrase is present in a comparative, it appears in the in.essive form:

(44) jaq’ˤuł łera
garadus-j-a:
ħuł-zo-ƛ’a:j
tatanu (joł).

today
five.OBL degree-OS-IN.ESS yesterday-LNK2-SUPER-ABL warm be.PRS

‘It’s five degrees warmer today than yesterday.’

Tsez also has comparative correlatives of the type the more… the better. In such
comparative correlatives, the relative clause always appears with the equative suffix –ce,
and the parallel clause is expressed by a regular finite construction. In the following
example, we show the relative clause in brackets:

(45) [eli
b-eže
b-a:q-ru]-*(ce)

we(IPL).ABS IPL-big IPL-become-PST.PTCP-EQU

r-aqˤu
šebin
r-a:j
elu-r.
IV-many thing(IV).ABS IV-come.FUT.DEF we-LAT
‘The older we get, the more we know (lit. the bigger we become, the more things

32
will come to us).’

4.7.
Co-ordination and chaining

Noun phrases are coordinated by means of the suffix -n(o), e.g., 0. Disjunction is
expressed by the placement of -ja ‘or’ (see 3.9) on each constituent:

(46)
k’et’u-ja ʁˁʷaj-a

cat-or
dog-or

‘a cat or a dog’

Coordination of clauses is rare; usually coordinate clauses are not linked by
conjunctions, but conjunctions are not disallowed.

(47) werharaw q’aj-ƛ’o
a:či,

winner
shepherds’_cabin-SUPER.ESS be.FUTINDEF

q’uraw ˁijat’a
a:či.
loser
at_the_herd be.FUTINDEF
‘The winner gets the best (lit. the winner will be at the shepherds’ cabin, the loser
will be with the herd).’

Coordination is also observed in conditional sentences with the conditional
adverb yoɬi ‘assuming; if’:

(48) a. tatanu ʁudi r-oq-χo
joɬi

warm day
IV-become-PRS COND

eli ker-a:-ʁor
esanad-a b-ik’-an.
we river-IN-VERS bathe-INF IPL-go-FUTDEF
‘If the day became warm, we would go to the river.’
b.
tatanu
ʁudi r-oq-si
joɬi

warm day
IV-become-PSTWIT COND

eli ker-a:-ʁor
esanad-a
b-ik’-a
zow-si
we river-IN-VERS bathe-INF IPL-go-INF be-PSTWIT
‘If the day had become warm, we would have gone to the river.’

The rich inventory of converbs available in Tsez allows it to use clause chaining freely;
in such chains, a number of converbal clauses are linked to a single finite clause. The

33
clause chain structure is often reinforced by the addition of -n(o) ‘and’ to the constituent
immediately preceding the converb. In the following example, two converbal clauses are
connected to the finite clause:

(49) [sasaqozoχ
[uži-r-no
j-ij-č’ej]
maħo-r-no

early_in_the_morning lad-LAT-and II-know-NEG.PFVCVB outside-LAT-and

j-oq-no]
q’orol-a:
uži-z
obiy-qo
II-become-PFV.CVB widow-ERG lad-GEN2 father-POSS.ESS

esi-n
nesi-ƛ’
ja:ł-ru
q’ʷariłi-ł-a:j.
tell-PSTUNW that.I-SUPER.ESS be-PSTPTCP sadness-CONT-ABL
‘In the morning the widow slipped outside unnoticed by the young man and told
his father about the woes that befell him.’

4.8.
Non-verbal predication

The copula combines with predicative adjectives and noun phrases. It is freely
omitted in natural speech, cf. 0 above.

(50) ˁali-s
obij
aħo
joɬ.

Ali-GEN1 father shepherd be.PRS

‘Ali’s father is a shepherd.’

4.9.
Information structure

Tsez has several particles that mark information-structural categories. In
particular, -n(o) and -gon mark topic and contrastive topic respectively; particles -kin
and -tow mark focus material. Long-distance agreement (see section 0) encodes the
topic status of the absolutive argument that triggers such agreement.

5.
Lexicon

Although no study on the Tsez lexicon as detailed as that conducted by Comrie
& Xalilov (2009) for Bezhta has been carried out, the general line of the results for
Bezhta carries over to Tsez. The percentage of loanwords in Bezhta obtained there for
the relevant lexical sample puts Bezhta somewhat below Japanese and Indonesian (and
well below English), and somewhat above Vietnamese and Swahili (Tadmor 2009: 56).
There is a substantial body of non-borrowed lexicon, much of it traceable back to Proto-
Nakh-Daghestanian or intermediate nodes, e.g. enij ‘mother’, is ‘ox’, mˁali ‘mountain’,
huni ‘road’ (Nikolayev & Starostin 1994: 201–202, 680–681, 834, 606–607).

34

The three main sources of borrowed vocabulary are, in descending order, Avar,
Russian, and Georgian. Avar has provided many words, including some for concepts
already present in Tsez culture, but also reflecting early Tsez contact with the outside
world, both physical and cultural; examples are halmaʁ ‘friend’, raɬad ‘sea’, gurħi
‘compassion’. A particularly large proportion of Tsez adjectives are of Avar origin, e.g.
bercinaw ‘beautiful’. (In the Avar etymon, the final -w is a gender I suffix, but in Tsez
the adjective is invariable for gender.) Avar verbs are borrowed in the infinitive form
accompanied by a Tsez light verb, usually -oq- ‘become’ for intransitives and -od- ‘do’
for transitives, e.g. bak’arzi -oq-/-od- ‘gather (tr/intr)’. Avar has also been the conduit
for many “orientalisms”, i.e. loans into Avar from Arabic, Persian, or Turkic languages,
e.g. q’alam ‘pencil’, ˁumru ‘life’; daru ‘medicament’, kumak ‘help’; huruš ‘rouble’.
Georgian has provided a substantial number of nouns reflecting the pre-technological
modern world, e.g. k’owzi ‘spoon’, burti ‘ball’. Currently, Russian is the main source of
loans, including internationalisms. Especially earlier loans from Russian often show
some phonological adaptation or other modifications, e.g. doχtur ‘doctor’ (Russian
doktor), gazit, gazjat, gazijat ‘newspaper’ (Russian gazeta), pabrika ‘factory’ (Russian
fabrika), iškap ‘cupboard’ (Russian škaf). Russian verbs, like Avar verbs, are borrowed
as infinitives with a Tsez light verb, e.g. paradat -od- ‘sell’ (Russian prodat´ ‘sell’)
Loans from Russian also include discourse particles, especially in slang.

More comparative work is needed before loans from other Tsezic or from Andic
languages can be consistently identified, but bišon ‘hundred’ is clearly a loan from an
Andic language (Nikolayev & Starostin 1994: 588).

6.
Sample text

This text was recorded in Tsebari in July 1994 by Ramazan Rajabov. The narrator is
Zahir Rajabov, then aged 58.

ˁomoj-no
is-no
donkey-and bull-and

zow-no-ƛaχ
zow-č’ej-ƛaχ
sida
ˁaƛ-a:
sis
žek’u.
was-PSTUNW-QUOT be-PSTUNW.NEG-QUOT one.OBL village-IN.ESS one man

nesi
žek’u-s
zow-no
ˁomoj-no
is-no.
that.I.OBL man-GEN1 be-PSTUNW donkey-and bull-and

sidaquɬ is-a:
neširu-r
riƛu
riƛi-n,

35
once
bull-ERG evening-LAT ploughing plough-PFVCVB

akiɬ-no,
idu-r
b-aj-nosi,
be tired-PFVCVB home-LAT III-come-ANTCVB

ˁomoj-qo-r
ˁarza
b-oʁ-no.
donkey-POSS-LAT complaint III-take-PSTUNW

dej
ˁomoj,
akiɬ-no
b-eχu-χ.
me-GEN1 donkey tire-PFVCVB III-die-PRS

di
hoboj da:-ƛ’
bet’erhan-es gurħi-n
a:nu.
me now
me-SUPER.ESS master-GEN1 compassion-and be.NEG.PRS

šebi-tow
di
r-od-an
howži?
what-indeed me IV-do-FUTDEF Now

is-χo
rok’u-n
r-eχu-n,
bull-AD.ESS heart-and IV-die-PFVCVB

ˁomoj-a:
neɬo-r
sis
ˁaq’lu
b-oj-no.
donkey-ERG that.nIPL-LAT one advice III-do-PSTUNW

neɬ-a:
r-oƛ-χo-ƛin
b-iči-ƛin
eƛi-n.
that.nI-ERG IV-be_sick-PRS-QUOT III-be.IMP-QUOT say-PSTUNW

hudaj
Is
ˁomoj-a:
a:ƛi-ru-χo-r
next_time Bull donkey-ERG say-PSTPTCP-AD-LAT

r-oƛ-χo-ƛin
b-iš-č’ej
b-iči-n.
IV-be_ill-PRS-QUOT III-eat-NEG.PFVCVB III-be-PSTUNW

bet’erhan-a: χabar-kin b-oj-č’ej
is-ez
mečʷ-a:
master-ERG
talk-even III-make-NEG.PFVCVB bull-GEN2 place-IN.ESS

ˁomoj
riƛu-ƚ
b-iži-n.
donkey ploughing-CONT.ESS III-take-PSTUNW

sidaquɬ b-ik’i-n
ˁomoj
riƛu-ɬ,
once
III-go-PSTUNW donkey ploughing-CONT.ESS

q’ˁuna
ʁude-ɬ
b-ik’i-n.

36
two.OBL day-CONT.ESS III-go-PSTUNW

b-eχu-n
tatu
ˁomoj-is.
III-die-PSTUNW strength donkey-GEN1

neɬ-a:
eƛi-n
žek’u-r
b-a:j-ru
ˁaq’lu
that.nI-ERG say-PSTUNW person-LAT III-make-PSTPTCP advice

q’ˁime-z
žukz-a:-r
b-a:su-ƛin
self-GEN2 malice-IN-LAT III-find.FUTINDF-QUOT

neɬƛ’osi bet’erhan-a: hoboj jedu
is
later
master-ERG
now
this.nI bull

b-eχu-χ-ƛin
b-eχʷaj-no
kur-no.
III-die-PRS-QUOT III-cut-PFVCVB throw-PSTUNW

hudu cezj-a:
eƛi-χosi
joɬ:
yes
Tsez-ERG say-PRSPTCP be.PRS

ħalt’o-q
b-ˁa:ƛ’-ru
posu mač’i-ƛ
b-a:χu.
work-POSS.ESS III-fear-PSTPTCP cattle dagger-SUB.ESS III-die.FUTINDF

The donkey and the bull

Once upon a time in a certain village there lived a man. That man had a donkey and a
bull. Once, when the bull came home tired after having ploughed the field till evening,
he complained to the donkey. “Dear donkey, I am dead tired. My master has no pity on
me now. What should I do now?” The donkey felt sorry for the bull and gave him a
piece of advice. He said he should pretend to be sick. Next day, the bull, as the donkey
had said, pretending to be sick, did not eat. The master, without even saying a word,
took the donkey instead of the bull to plough. One day the donkey went to plough, two
days he went. The donkey grew weak. He said that advice given to a person brings evil
to oneself. Later, the master, saying that this bull was now dying, suddenly slaughtered
it. That is why the Tsez people say: The animal that is afraid of work will die under the
dagger.

References

37
Abdulaev, Arsen K. & Isa K. Abdullaev. 2010. Cezyas folklor [Tsez folklore]. Leipzig
& Makhachkala: Lotos.
Alekseev, Mixail E. 1993. Alipbi bukvar´ cezskogo jazyka. Èksperimental´nyj variant
učebnika [Tsez primer. Test version of a textbook]. Moscow: Ministerstvo
obrazovanija Rossijskoj Federacii. Institut nacional´nyx problem obrazovanija.
Alekseev, Mikhail E. & Ramazan N. Radžabov. 1989. Tsez. In Michael Job (ed.),
Indigenous languages of the Caucasus, vol. 3: The North East Caucasian
languages, part 1, 115–163. Ann Arbor: Caravan Books.
Alekseev, Mixail E., Ramazan N. Radžabov & Arsen K. Abdulaev. 2003. Bukvar´
didojskogo jazyka [Dido primer]. 2nd edn. Makhachkaka & Moscow:
Ministerstvo obrazovanija Rossijskoj Federacii. Institut nacional´nyx problem
obrazovanija. Nacional´no-kul´turnaja avtonomija “Didojcy”.
Bokarev, Evgenij A. 1959. Cezskie (didojskie) jazyki Dagestana [The Tsezic (Didoic)
languages of Daghestan]. Moscow: Izd. AN SSSR.
Comrie, Bernard & Madzhid Khalilov. 2009. Loanwords in Bezhta, a Nakh-
Daghestanian language of the North Caucasus. In Martin Haspelmath & Uri
Tadmor (eds.), Loanwords in the world’s languages: A comparative handbook,
414–429. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Comrie, Bernard & Maria Polinsky. 1998. The great Daghestanian case hoax. In Anna
Siewierska & Jae Jung Song (eds.), Case, typology and grammar: In honor of
Barry J. Blake, 95–114. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dirr, Adolf M. 1909. Materialy dlja izučenija jazykov i narečij ando-didojskoj gruppy
[Materials for the study of the languages and dialects of the Andi-Dido group].
Sbornik materialov dlja opisanija mestnostej i plemen Kavkaza. vol. 40, fasc. 3.
1–114.
Fukuda, Shin. 2008. Backward control. Language and Linguistics Compass 2. 168–195.
Gagliardi, Annie, Michael Goncalves, Maria Polinsky & Nina Radkevich. 2014.
Biabsolutives in Lak and Tsez. Lingua 150. 137–170.
Gagliardi, Annie & Jeffrey Lidz. 2014. Statistical insensitivity in the acquisition of Tsez
noun classes. Language 90. 58–89.
Imnajšvili, David S. 1963. Didojskij jazyk v sravnenii s ginuxskim i xvaršijskim
jazykami [The Dido language in comparison with the Hinuq and Khwarshi
languages]. Tbilisi: Izd. AN Gruzinskoj SSR.
Kibrik, Aleksandr E. 1981. Materialy k tipologii èrgativnosti. 15. Cezskij jazyk.
Moscow: Institut russkogo jazyka AN SSSR. Problemnaja gruppa po
èksperimental´noj i prikladnoj lingvistike.

38
Kibrik, Aleksandr E. & Sandro V. Kodzasov. 1990. Sopostavitel´noe izučenie
dagestanskix jazykov. Imja. Fonetika [Comparative study of Daghestanian
languages. The noun. Phonetics]. Moscow: MGU.
Kodzasov, Sandro V. 1986. Faringo-laringal´noe suženie v dagestanskix jazykax
[Pharyngeo-laryngeal narrowing in Daghestanian languages]. In Georgij Klimov
(ed.), Aktual´nye problemy dagestansko-naxskogo jazykoznanija, 34–46.
Makhachkala: Dagestanskij filial AN SSSR.
Maddieson, Ian, Ramazan Rajabov & Aaron Sonnenschein. 1996. The main features of
Tsez phonetics. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 93. 94–110.
Nikolayev, Sergey L. & Sergey A. Starostin. 1994. A North Caucasian etymological
dictionary. Moscow: Asterisk.
Plaster, Keith, Maria Polinsky & Boris Harizanov. 2013. Noun classes grow on trees:
Noun classification in the North-East Caucasus. In Balthasar Bickel, Lenore A.
Grenoble, David A. Peterson & Alan Timberlake (eds.), Language typology and
historical contingency: In honor of Johanna Nichols, 153–170. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Polinsky, Maria. 2015. Embedded finite complements, indexical shift, and binding in
Tsez. Languages of the Caucasus 1. 1–37.
Polinsky, Maria & Bernard Comrie. in prep. A grammar of Tsez.
Polinsky, Maria & Eric Potsdam. 2001. Long-distance agreement and topic in Tsez.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 19. 583–646.
Polinsky, Maria & Eric Potsdam. 2002. Backward control. Linguistic Inquiry 33. 245–
282.
Starostin, Sergej A. 1987. Kommentarii k kavkazovedčeskim rabotam N. S. Trubeckogo
[Commentaries on the Caucasological works of N. S. Trubetzkoy]. In N. S.
Trubeckoj, Izbrannye trudy po filologii, 437–473. Moscow: Progress.
Tadmor, Uri. 2009. Loanwords in the world’s languages: Findings and results. In Martin
Haspelmath & Uri Tadmor (eds.): Loanwords in the world’s languages: A
comparative handbook, 55–75. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
VPN 2010. Vserossijskaja perepis´ naselenija 2010 g. Tom 4. Nacional´nyj sostav i
vladenie jazykami, graždanstvo. Tablica 5. Vladenie jazykami naseleniem
Rossijskoj Federacii [All-Russian population census 2010. Vol. 4. Ethnic
composition and command of languages, citizenship. Table 5. Command of
languages by the population of the Russian Federation]. Moscow: Federal´naja
služba gosudarstvennoj statistiki
http://www.gks.ru/free_doc/new_site/perepis2010/croc/Documents/Vol4/pub-04-
05.pdf (accessed 01 December 2017).

39
Xalilov, Madžid Š. 1999. Cezsko-russkij slovar´ [Tsez-Russian dictionary].
Makhachkala: DNC RAN. IJaLI.

Abbreviations

ABL – Ablative
ABS – Absolutive
ANTCVB – Anterior Converb
AD – Localization ‘at’
APUD – Localization ‘near’
CAUS – Causative
CAUSCVB – causal converb
COND – Conditional
CONT – Localization ‘in (a mass)’

DISTR – Distributive
EQU – Equative
ERG – Ergative
ESS – Essive
FUTDEF – Future Definite
FUTINDF – Future Indefinite

GEN1 – Genitive 1
GEN2 – Genitive 2

IMP – Imperative
IPFVCVB – Imperfective Converb
IN – Localization ‘in a hollow space’
INF – Infinitive
INS – Instrumental

INTNS – Intensifier
intr – intransitive
LAT – Lative
LOCCVB – Locative Converb
LNK1 – Linker 1

LNK2 – Linker 2
MSD – Masdar
NEG – Negation
NMLZ – Nominalizer
OBL – Oblique
OPT – Optative

40
PFVCVB – Perfective Converb
PL – Plural
POSS – Possessive
POT – Potential
PROH – Prohibitive
PRS – Present
PRSPTCP – Present Participle
PSTPTCP – Past Participle
PSTWIT – Past Witnessed
PSTUNW – Past Unwitnessed
Q – Interrogative

QUOT – Quotative
RES – Resultative

RESTR – Restrictive
SUB – Localization ‘under’
SUPER – Localization ‘on’
tr – transitive
VERS – Versative

The Roman numerals I–IV are used to indicate genders; nI means ‘non-I’ gender. To
avoid confusion, the first person singular pronoun is glossed ‘me’.
