2

A Grammar Sketch of Natqgu [ntu]:
An Oceanic language of Santa Cruz, Solomon Islands
Brenda H. Boerger
1. Introduction1
1.1 About Natqgu [ntu] language
Natqgu [ntu], also spelled Natügu, is an Austronesian language, of the Temotu sub-group of
Oceanic (Ross & Næss 2007). It belongs to the Reefs-Santa Cruz (RSC) languages, comprised of
Äiwoo [nfl] (Næss, multiple refs) in the Reef Islands, and the three other Santa Cruz (SC)
languages—Engdewu [ngr] (Vaa 2013), Nalögo [nlz] (Boerger 2008, Boerger & Zimmerman
2012, Alfarano 2021) and Noipä [npx] (Boerger 2017).
Natqgu is spoken by nearly 5,000 people living in the home area on Santa Cruz Island, in
Temotu Province, the easternmost province of Solomon Islands. Maps are included in the
separate PDF, Background and Technical Guide. Natqgu is concentrated in Graciosa Bay’s
fourteen villages and forms a dialect chain that reaches from Baengr (Mbaengö) on the west
coast, going along the bay and across the north coast as far as Nokz (Noka) in the northeast. The
north coast villages are primarily earlier settlements by speakers from Graciosa Bay, but also
include settlements by speakers of other languages from the province. Natqgu is also spoken by
Santa Cruz Islanders who reside in the national capital, Honiara, or who have intermarried with
speakers of other languages. The variety spoken in Bznwz village was identified as having the
highest status and being understood by the most speakers of more distant villages (Simons 1977).
Earlier descriptions of Natqgu were undertaken in part by Wurm (1970, 1978, 1992), but
to date, no grammar or grammar sketch has been produced. More recently, aspects of Natqgu
have been described in the literature2. Some key grammatical properties of Natqgu warrant
foreshadowing here before the more detailed discussion later.
One feature that distinguishes Natqgu from many other Oceanic languages is its distinct
lack of reduplication for any purpose. However, exact repetition is used in narratives for stylistic
purposes.
The person and number enclitics are also unusual. Natqgu has two sets of person and
number enclitics, a primary set (Set I) normally used on verbs to signal subjects, and a secondary
set (Set II), (van den Berg & Boerger 2011), which can sometimes replace the Set I enclitics, and
with the same Set II forms also modifying free pronominal forms and possessives. Like the other
Santa Cruz languages,3 Natqgu has a minimal-augmented enclitic pronominal system with four
basic persons: first person, first+second person (‘you and I’), second person, and third person,
which occur in two numbers, minimal and augmented. Nouns are either possessed directly or
indirectly by the use of nine possessive classifiers and generic genitives, (§3.6).
In terms of clause structure, also like other SC languages (Alfarano & Boerger 2022),
Natqgu has a transitivity-based clause system with 16 valency-changing morphemes. Intransitive
clauses have one core argument S (subject). When the S argument is an NP, the word order is SV,
but can change to VS when S is a pronominal enclitic. The third person augmented in both Set I

1 I am indebted to scholars working on other Santa Cruz languages. I have leaned heavily on the grammars of
Nalögo (Alfarano 2021) and Engdewu (Vaa 2013) in this write up. I’m also grateful to Åshild Næss, Paul
Unger, and Deborah Hill, the latter in her role as TILP editor, whose comments on drafts of the grammar sketch
significantly improved its accuracy, clarity and flow.
2 Boerger 1996, Boerger 2007, Næss & Boerger 2008, Boerger 2009, Lober & Boerger 2009, Van den Berg &
Boerger 2011, Boerger et al 2012, Boerger 2013, Boerger 2019, Lackey & Boerger 2021, Alfarano & Boerger
(2022), and Næss, Alfarano, Boerger & Vaa, (To appear). My fieldwork on Natqgu was supplemented by two
12-month Documenting Endangered Languages Fellowships in 2010–11 (#FN-50063-10) to work on the
grammar and in 2015–16 (#FN-230212-15) to work on the lexicon.
3 Äiwoo has an additional number that adds one to the minimal set, for a third distinction called unit-augmented
(Næss & Boerger 2008).

3

and Set II is a circumfix form with a prefix and a subject enclitic. Transitive clauses display two
core arguments A (agent) and O (object), in the word order VAO, where A is either a nominal
argument or a person and number enclitic. 4
Subordinate clauses and most peripheral arguments occur post-verbally. Peripheral
arguments are communicated by a varied collection of prepositions, conjunctions, and verb-
internal valency changing devices, which license additional arguments, as described in §7.
The fieldwork and primary text are described in the Background and Technical Guide.
2. Phonology
2.1 Phonemes
While there are clearly cognates of ProtoOceanic (POc) in Natqgu, there has also been
considerable change in the vowels between the POc system and Natqgu (Lackey & Boerger
2021). In fact, Natqgu has 10 oral and five nasalized vowel phonemes, as in Table 1 (Andrews
2020). In place of the IPA symbols /y/ and /ɵ/, I use instead the symbols <ü> and <ö>
respectively. Similarly, in place of /j/, I use the symbol <y> for the glide. These adjustments
make the prose flow more smoothly in the sections which follow, and correlate better with both
the earlier and later orthographies.

Natqgu vowels

oral
nasal

front
central
back

high
i, ü

u

mid
e, ö

o
e͂

ə
ɔ

ǝ̃
ɔ̃
low
æ
a

æ͂
a͂

In addition, Natqgu has 14 consonant phonemes as identified in Table 2. The voiced stops
are optionally prenasalized with the oldest speakers preferring prenasalization and the youngest
speakers normally choosing not to use it, except in some fixed expressions.

Natqgu consonants

labial
alveolar
palatal
velar
voiceless stop
p
t

k
voiced stop
b
d

g
nasal
m
n

ŋ
fricative
ß
s

lateral

l

semivowel
w

y

These consonants combine to produce the following word-initial consonant clusters: pw,
bw, mw, tw, dw, nw, gw, py, by, my, ny, ky, ngy, pl, bl, gl, pn, mn, and lv [lß]. The most unusual of
these is [lβ], in which [l] is not syllabic. This sequence violates the sonority sequencing principle
(Parker 2012) which prefers that initial cluster sequences exhibit increasing sonorance
approaching the nucleus of the syllable. That is, the clusters like pl, bl, and gl, start with a stop
and the more sonorant liquid l follows, and is in turn followed by a vowel. But the verb lvc ‘fly’
has an lv sequence, where sonority does not increase approaching the vowel. That is, even though
the liquid l is more sonorous than the voiced fricative v, the l precedes v.
The maximum syllable template is [CXV)]σmax, in which X is a consonant or a vowel.

4 Some theories prefer P patient (Kroeger 2004), rather than O object, but I maintain the S, A, and O
terminology published by other authors working on Reefs-Santa Cruz languages. See discussion in 3.1.

4

Diphthongs and vowel-vowel patterns
Given the ten oral vowels of Natqgu, there are 100 possible vowel-vowel combinations.
Pronunciation depends on several factors: slow vs. fast speech, emphatic vs. non-emphatic
speech, stressed vs. unstressed syllables, and morpheme boundaries.
The diphthongs of Natügu involve a progression from open to more closed, i.e. lower to
higher, with the first, more open vowel as nucleus and the closed one acting as an off glide. The
preferred second position vowels, then, are [i] and [u]. The attested diphthongs within a single
morpheme are listed here: with initial [a]—/ae/, /ai/, /ao/, /au/, /aɔ/, /aü/, /aö/,
•
with initial low (non-[a])—/æu/,
•
with initial [e]—/ei/, /eu/,
•
with initial mid—/oi/, /ou/, /öi/, and /ǝu/.
We see that /a/ initiates seven diphthongs and /æ/ one, for a total of eight which start with
low vowels. In addition, there are six diphthongs which start with mid vowels. Every vowel is a
member of at least one diphthong.
There is frequently a difference between the pronunciation of vowel sequences within a
morpheme and those produced at the junction of two morphemes. For example, /kai/ [k ͪay] ‘first’
is articulated as a diphthong, while /na-iklö/ composed of an irrealis prefix with the verb root
‘sprinkle,’ is pronounced [na.'i.k ͪ lö]. If the second vowel of a two vowel sequence must occur in
a position to receive stress, the vowels must be assigned to separate syllables.
Generally for vowel-vowel sequences, if the vowel sequence is HIGH-LOW, it is manifested
as two syllables. If the vowel sequence is LOW-HIGH, it is one syllable.
2.2 Phonotactics
Words can begin with any consonant or vowel except the high front rounded vowel /ü/. Text
analysis shows that the open syllable structure CV occurs most frequently (76%). The single
vowel, V, is the next most frequently occurring syllable type (14%). Syllables composed of a
consonant and two vowels CVV, occur 9% of the time. Closed syllables are infrequent, under 1%
of the total. The final consonant in CVN syllables is always a nasal. The only true closed
syllables involve these syllable-final nasals, whereas other apparent C-final words are actually an
instance of the deletion of /ü/ or /u/ word-finally. See rule 4 below.
2.3 Stress
Natqgu, like most Oceanic languages, exhibits stress on the penultimate mora of a syllable. Single
morphemes have been identified with from one to six syllables. Most roots are comprised of one,
two or three syllables. Primary stress remains penultimate in multisyllabic complex words. The
placement of secondary stress correlates with the basic foot type found in Natügu. Beyond one-
syllable words the foot type is a syllabic trochee. That is, feet are left headed and quantity
insensitive.
2.4 Orthography
The Natqgu vowel inventory is comprised of ten oral and five nasalized vowels. In an
orthography suggested by Stephen Wurm (1970, 1978), the additional oral vowels beyond <a, e,
i, o, u> were written using diacritics, as indicated below in Table 3. The nasalized vowels were
marked with a tilde. A revised version of the old orthography has nasalization marked with a
straight apostrophe following the vowel and the symbol for [ɔ] was changed from an underlined
‘o’ to â, in collaboration with linguists working in related languages. Note that both the old and
new orthographies use ‘j’ for the affricate [dʒ] and ‘y’ for the glide [j], following their use in the
orthography of English, the national language of Solomon Islands.

5

Old and New Natqgu Vowel Orthographies
old
new
IPA
Examples
English glosses
a
a
a
kalva
kalva
betel nut
e
e
e
neke
neke
who, interrogative
i
i
i
mibi
mibi
rotten
o
o
o
itoto
itoto
infant
u
u
u
tumu
tumu
triggerfish
â
c
ɔ
nâdâ
ncdc
carrying stick from which things hang
ü
q
y (ü)
nümü
nqmq
way, tradition, character
ö
r
ɵ (ö)
möbö
mrbr
forget
ä
x
æ
käökä
kxrkx
that which is spicy
ë
z
ə
ëvë
zvz
always
In the mid-1990s the orthography was modified to facilitate typesetting at the time and to
eliminate diacritics, such that c, q, r, x and z became vowel symbols, and a straight apostrophe
replaced the tilde to indicate nasalization (Boerger 1996, 2007). Natügu was spelled Natqgu.
2.5 Morphophonemics
Natqgu exhibits a number of morphophonemic rules, primarily relating to labial consonants and
rounded vowels. Most of the rules are more like principles, in that they vary between speakers,
dialects, and registers and their triggering environments also show some variation. Some dialect
differences are accounted for by differences in rule ordering. Over all, these capture the
predominant processes in Natqgu.5

Rule 1. Consonant epenthesis, with [n] (or [l]) insertion
Three members of Set I person and number enclitics (Table 6, §3.1) begin with vowels:
=x ‘first person minimal’, =q, ‘second person minimal,’ and =amu ‘second person augmented.’
To break up a vowel+vowel sequence created when the preceding morpheme ends in a mid
vowel, an epenthetic [n] (or sometimes [l]) is optionally inserted between the two morphemes.
Older speakers prefer the insertion, younger ones do not.

Öpiobële badö kä “Nike tükuki-ngönamu?”
r-pi-o-bz=le
ba=dr
kx
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Gᴅɪʀ.down-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII
ѕᴜʙʀ
nike tq-kuki-ngr=amu
what ʀʟ-cook-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=2ᴀᴜɢI
‘He said down to them, “What are you cooking?”’ (33.17)
In the first line of sentence (1), look at the last word in the direct speech quotes. The /n/ of namu
is epenthetic. It is not included in the analysis lines.

Rule 2. Assimilation - Devoicing
Devoicing occurs across morpheme boundaries when a morpheme beginning with a voiceless
stop, usually /t/ or /k/, precedes a morpheme beginning with a voiced bilabial consonant, that is,
either /m/ or /b/.

X nëalvëtöplö bagö kämu nëöpna'ngö më pu ä nëotangö më tokiö vea.
x
nz-alvztr-mq=lr
bagr
kxmu nzrpna'ngr
and
3ᴀᴜɢ-teach-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢII
how
shooting
mz pu
x
nzotangr
mz
toki-r-vea
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
gun
and
fighting
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
knife-ɢᴇɴ1ʙ-war
‘And they taught us how to shoot with guns and to fight with swords.’ (52.09)

5 Abbreviations are found in Appendix A.

6

In sentence (2), compare the second word, nëalvëtöplö, to the morpheme line to see that the form
underlying ‘p’ is actually -mq ‘Pᴅɪʀ.hither.’ In it, the ‘m’ has devoiced to ‘p’ by rule 2 and then
the final ‘q’ in -pq is deleted by rule 4.

Rule 3. Metathesis and Class Change
In most dialects the final -u ‘neg’ of the circumfix negative is transposed with the immediately
preceding person and number marker and subsequently changes from /u/ to /w/. Some speakers
have both metathesis and also add a further -u ‘neg’ anyway.

X vea-mâpü bange “Tödwatöwamu më naonöä lâ?”
x
vea-mou-mq=Ø
ba=nge
tr-dwa-tr=amu-u
and
ask-again-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴍɪɴII”
ɴᴇɢ-jump-Gᴅɪʀ.in=2ᴀᴜɢI-ɴᴇɢ
mz
naonrx
lc
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
doorway
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘And he questioned me further, “You didn't go inside that doorway, did you?”’ (06.07)
In sentence (3), look at tödwatöwamu ‘you didn’t go in’. Note that -u ‘neg’ in the morpheme line
has jumped over the entire preceding morpheme and not just the immediately preceding sound,
and it has changed to [w] in the context of the following [a], maintaining a CV sequence.

Dâkta badö kru kâng nëpötë-mopwëng më lâsu nëötöngëtiolö Këpten, nëötâo-ngödö
më bot.
dckta
badr kru
kc-ng

nz-prtz-mou-bz=ngq mz
lcsu
doctor ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ crew
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
3ᴀᴜɢ-enter-again-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ship
nz-rtrngz-ti-o=lr kzpten nz-rtc-o-ngr=dr mz
bot
3ᴀᴜɢ-do-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.down=3ᴀᴜɢIA
captain 3ᴀᴜɢ1-throw-Gᴅɪʀ.down-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴀᴜɢII ᴘʀᴇᴘ
boat
‘The doctor and the crew reboarded the ship, they got the Captain, and threw him down
into a boat.’ (19.10)
Note that a similar metathesis and class change occurs when mou ‘again’ occurs before another
morpheme starting with a bilabial consonant. In sentence (4), -bz becomes -pz by dissimilation
and the final /u/ of mou methathesizes with /p/ and changes its class from vowel to a glide,
yielding pwz of the surface form. If, on the other hand, the personal directional had been -mq
rather than -bz, the same processes would have occurred, yielding pwq rather than pwz. In these
sequences of morphemes, then, the only phone of the underlying personal directional which is
preserved is its vowel, either /q/ or /z/.

Rule 4. Word/Syllable Final ‘q’ Deletion
Whenever ‘q’ occurs word-finally, it is deleted in fast speech, but may be retained in careful
speech. This happens no matter what the preceding consonant is. This was illustrated by sentence
(2) when mq became [p]. When the preceding consonant is a voiceless stop the ‘q’ can become
aspiration. For example, vz-tr-mq |go-GDIR.in-PDIR.hither| ‘come in’ becomes [vztrpʰ] with stress
on trpʰ. That is, penultimate stress is assigned, rule two applies, then rule 4 deletes [q], leaving
stress where it originally occurred.

Rule 5. Dissimilation in the context of nasals:
When two consecutive morphemes begin with a voiced stop or nasal and a homorganic nasal, in
either order, the first consonant of the second morpheme is changed to increase contrast between
the morphemes. This can involve devoicing, denasalization, or a change in place of articulation.
Sentence (5a) illustrates /m/ in -mq ‘hither’ being denasalized and devoiced due to the
previous morpheme also staring with /m/. In (5b) the sequence /ngr+nge/ becomes [ngrne], with
the second velar nasal changed to an alveolar nasal.

7

a. Mëdealwä mwitä käpipëne ä sâ tümelëpe-moupü.
Mzdealwx
mwi-tx=Ø kx-pipz-ne x
sc=
Mzdealwx
sleep-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS ѕᴜʙʀ-few- ɪɴᴛѕ and
ᴘꜰᴠ=

tq-melz=pe-mou-mq=Ø
ʀʟ-awaken=ᴄᴏѕ-again-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘Mzdealwx slept just a little while and then he woke back up.’ (23.13)

b. Skul kä mnâ-ayönö-ngöne dötüde Alankaulë.
skul kx
mnc-ayrnr-ngr=nge drtq=de
Alankaulz
school ѕᴜʙʀ
stay, live, be-first-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=1ᴍɪɴII
name=3ᴍɪɴII
Alangaula
‘The school that I first lived at is named Alangaula.’ (28.01)

Rule 6. Nasal maintenance rule
If a nasal consonant, frequently /m/, is denasalized to /p/ (due to assimilation rule 2 or
dissimilation rule 5), the presence of the consonantal nasal may be maintained by shifting
nasalization to the following /a/, /o/, or /c/ vowel, even if there is an intervening consonant.

Öpibë Mama kä, “Ninge Käakölë kä ngi naö skul ä ni-këpâ' Mama.”
r-pi-bz

mama kx
ninge
kx-a-krlz
kx
ngi
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
priest ѕᴜʙʀ
be=1ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-know ѕᴜʙʀ
be

nar
skul x
ni-kz-mq=x
mama
head school and
be-also-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=1ᴍɪɴI
priest
‘Father said, “I am a teacher who is head of the school and I am also a priest.”’ (42.28)
In example (6), the underlying ni-kz-mq=x ‘I am also’ becomes ni-kzpc'. The voiceless /k/ of kz
‘also’ causes -mq ‘hither’ to devoice to -pq. Then a dispreference for ‘q’ plus ‘x’ sequences
triggers a change from =x to =c, one of several variants of the first person minimal enclitic. The
nasalization from /m/ in -mq is transferred to the vowel /c/ so its presence is preserved.
3. Nouns and Noun Phrases
3.1 Pronouns
As introduced and illustrated above, Natqgu has two sets of person and number enclitics. The
primary set (Set I), to signal subjects and third person objects. The secondary set (Set II), replaces
Set I enclitics in some contexts. The Set II forms also occur as enclitics in possessive
constructions (column 6) and free pronominal forms (columns 4 and 5). In glossing the forms, the
set to which an enclitic form belongs is indicated by I or II as part of its gloss.
These occur in a minimal-augmented system with four basic persons: first person,
first+second person (‘you and I’), second person, and third person, which occur in two numbers,
minimal and augmented, as illustrated in Table 4.
Pronominal objects of transitive clauses often use the free pronouns of columns 4 and 5.
In some contexts, the 3MIN and more rarely the 3AUG objects from column 2 are marked directly
on verbs. These object forms are identical to the subject forms, except that as objects the 3AUG
forms do not co-occur with a 3AUG prefix. The objects are identified by the presence of a subject
already being present in the clause, either an enclitic subject preceding the enclitic object or with
a following unbound nominal subject. Since I discuss transitivity using S, A, and O, I adopt P as
part of the gloss for these third person objects. Some speakers attach the object enclitics to subject
nouns as in ‘wave/it’ of nzalxngitikr ebio le ‘the wave causing it to tilt’ of example (49). Others
attach an object enclitic (such as =ng 3AUG) to the verb with the subject (God) following, as in
(110): leplz kx ka-neba=ng Gct zmatq ‘people to whom God gives (them) power.’
The Set II pronominal enclitics of column 3 are triggered by two contexts: i) to mark
subjects following the peripheral applicative (§7.6) and ii) to mark subjects of passive clauses
(§7.7).

8

Column 4 of Table 4 shows that these free pronouns are made up of a base ni- ‘be’6 to
which person and number enclitics are attached. Similarly, indirect object pronouns of column 5
have a dative base ba- to which the person and number enclitics are attached.

Natqgu person and number enclitics
3.2 Noun types

Count vs. mass nouns
Natqgu subcategorizes nouns around four parameters—i) count vs. mass nouns, ii) common vs.
proper nouns, iii) animate vs. inanimate nouns, and iv) direct vs. indirect possession.
There is no case or number marked on nouns. Instead, the role of the noun is determined
in part by word order. Number, if indicated, occurs on a demonstrative modifier. Within that
context, Natqgu’s categorization of count and mass nouns is fairly typical. Mass nouns are those
expressing quantities of rice or water, for example, which are not counted. Such mass nouns take
a form of the indefinite plural du ‘some’ as in (7).

Angüpäamu du lue më belue lâng.
Angq-px=amu
du
lue
mz
be-lue
lc-ng
draw-GDIR.out=2AUGII
ɪɴᴅꜰ.ᴘʟ water
PREP
skin-water
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-PL
‘Draw out some water from those waterskins.’ (John 2:8)
The form du can also occur with nouns which in other contexts are countable, but which
in a particular context are indefinite, as in (8).

6 Wurm (1978: 973) analyses the form ni- as a reduction of the Natqgu verb ngini ‘to be.’ Næss and Boerger
(2008) accept this hypothesis. Additionally, in Natqgu, the possibility of the change-of-state enclitic =pe
occurring between the base and the person ending as in ni=pe=de ‘he has become’ gives evidence for the use of
ni as a predicate.

Set I
Set II

1
2
3
4
5
6
Person
Verbal
subject
enclitics
Verbal
object
enclitics
Verbal
enclitics
Free
subject/
object
pronouns
Free
indirect
object pronouns
Possessive
construction
enclitics
minimal

1
=x

=nge
ni=nge
ba=nge
=nge
1+2
=ki

=gi
ni=gi
ba=gi
=gi
2
=u

=m(q)
ni=mq
ba=mq
=mq
3
=le (A, O)
=Ø (S)
=le
=de
ni=de
ba=de
=de
augmented

1
=kr

=gr
ni=gr
ba=gr
=gr
1+2
=ku

=gu
ni=gu
ba=gu
=gu
2
=amu

=mu
ni=mu
ba=mu
=mu
3
nz- ‘3AUG’
tz- ‘ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ’
na- ‘ɪʀʀ’
=lr (A)
=ng(q) (S)
=lr
=ng(q)
nz- ‘3AUG’
tz- ‘ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ’
na- ɪʀʀ’
=dr (A)
=ng(q) (S)
ni=dr
ba=dr
=dr

9

A' koma, kä tümâlamu du peao kälöpö më löpëki, bëkü kalëmamu.
a' koma
kx
tq-mc=amu
du peao
kx-lrpr
mz
lrpzki

but
today
ѕᴜʙʀ
ʀʟ-see=2ᴀᴜɢI
ɪɴᴅꜰ.ᴘʟ torch
ѕᴜʙʀ-wet
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
road
bzkq
kalz-mq=amu
ᴘʀᴏʜ
pick.up-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=2ᴀᴜɢI
‘But today, if you see some wet coconut torches on the road, don’t pick them up.’
(26.10)
A count noun is one which can co-occur with a numeral quantifier following it. In
sentence (9) the phrase ‘six not very tall coconut trees’ is formed by the noun ‘coconut trees’
followed by a simple relative clause with the subordinating particle kx ‘which are not long’. In
place of the subordinating particle one can also find one of the four simple demonstratives. They
occur after something has already been introduced and is therefore definite. See discussion in
§10.2.

Tupäm më nabë nounâ mölâde nâ nëlu kä töboiu esë'më.
tu-px-mq mz nabz
nounc mrlcde
nc
nzlu
stand-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.hither ᴘʀᴇᴘ area
tree there
tree
coconut
kx
tr-boi-u
esz'mz
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɴᴇɢ-be.long-ɴᴇɢ six
‘Standing in a grove of trees there were six not very tall coconut trees [Cocos nucifera].’
(39.04)
Natqgu numerals can also function as predicates, as illustrated in (10). Note that in the noun
phrase ‘those two guys,’ the form ‘two’ is actually a verb ‘they are two,’ with the identical
morphology as on the next verb ‘they went,’ literally, ‘Those men who are two they went…’
Nâblo kâng nëling nëvëng sâ tëobü-kapüpäpeng më skul.
ncblo
kc-ng

nz-li=ng

nz-vz=ng
sc=

man ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
3ᴀᴜɢ-two=3ᴀᴜɢIS
3ᴀᴜɢ1-go=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘꜰᴠ=

tz-obq-kapq-px=pe=ng

mz
skul
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-look-hidden-Gᴅɪʀ.out=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ
school
‘Those two men went and they spied out the school.’ (38.01)
Furthermore, the noun or noun phrase may also be modified by a bare numeral as in (13a)’s wiki
tq ‘three weeks’.
Natqgu nouns have little inflectional morphology. There are no person or gender affixes
on common nouns. Plurality on count nouns is beginning to be marked by the youngest
generation, who add the plural suffix -ng(q) to some nouns to make them plural, possibly as a
result of contact with English. The norm, though, is for context to disambiguate number or to add
the plural suffix -ng(q) to a demonstrative as in (7)’s belue lcng ‘those waterskins.’

Common vs. proper nouns
In addition, Natqgu distinguishes proper nouns from common nouns. The naming conventions of
Santa Cruz Island differentiate some proper names of people based on whether they are male or
female, doing so by means of prefixes, such that me- indicates a male (example 11) and i- a
female (example 12). The slot following the marker for gender is normally filled by a verb, and
yields attributive names. The same verb can be used in both the male and female names. Not all
indigenous names follow this convention, but very many do. Occasionally, in narratives, animals
are personified and given human names.
Meya

Meplc Menapi

Mewxbu

M-paddle

M-ripe M-IRR-say

M-sit

‘Paddle guy’
‘Ripe guy’ ‘Wants to talk guy’
‘Sit guy’

10

Ikai
Inapi

Iwxbu
F-first
F-IRR-say

F-sit
‘First gal’
‘Wants to talk gal’
‘Sit gal’

Animate vs. inanimate nouns
The distinction between animate and inanimate nouns is manifest in a handful of verbs which
make this distinction. Two of these are mnc vs. yc ‘stay~live’ (13) and bz vs mz ‘die’ (14). Note
that in (13a) mnc takes an animate subject ‘group of people’ while in (13b) yc takes an inanimate
subject ‘ship’.
a. Dëbede lâ ne Mr Lore nëmnâtipämlö peto wiki tü....
dzbede

lc
ne
Mr
Lore

group

ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl
Mr
Lore

nz-mnc-ti-px-mq=lr

peto
wiki
tq

3ᴀᴜɢ-stay-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIA
bush
week
three

‘That group of Mr. Lore's were out in the bush for three weeks,…’ (43.07)

b. Më nëveângö lâde yâtäbë lâsu sâdö lö Japan kätöka.
mz nz-vec-ngr
lc=de
yc-tx-bz
lcsu
sc=dr
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-fight-ɴᴍʟᴢ ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII stay-ɪɴᴛѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
ship
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=3ᴀᴜɢII
lr Japan kx-trka
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ Japan ѕᴜʙʀ-bad
‘From that battle there was a damaged Japanese ship.’ (39.13)
Similarly, in (14a) ‘no one knows when he died’ uses the animate verb bz ‘die’, while (14b) uses
the inanimate verb mz ‘die’ to talk about a sore healing up and (14c) uses mz ‘die’ to talk about a
tree dying. Another context where mz ‘die’ occurs is when fires die out. So the inanimate category
includes plants as living things which are inanimate, as well as things which were never living.
a. Ä töpnëngö kä ökölë me vëkimle, mëli kä nëmângö mëte ä mëli kä bë-ngöde.
x
trpnzngr
kx
r-krlz

me
vz-ki-mq=le

mzli
and
none

ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴍɪᴅ-know
place
go-path-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
time
kx
nz-mc-ngr
mz=te
x
mzli
kx
bz-ngr=de

ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴘᴀѕ-see-ᴀᴘᴘʟ
eye=3ᴍɪɴII
and
time
ѕᴜʙʀ
die-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII
‘And there was no one who knew where he came from, when he was born, and when he
died.’ (Hebrews 7:3)
b. Ä mëli kâpwë käsüki lepë kâ mëtätö pnë kë.
x
mzli
kcpwz kxsqki lepz
kc

mz-tx-tr=pnz-kz=Ø

and
time
same
sore
leper
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
die-ɪɴᴛѕ-Gᴅɪʀ.in=ᴄᴍᴘʟ-also=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘And at the same time the leper’s sore also died out completely.’ (Matthew 8:3)
c. Öpibo bade kä, “Tüyökelvëä nâ nëlu kâ yöplatöngö naöm mëtupe.”
r-pi-bz=x
bade
kx
tq-yrke-lvz=x
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
ʀʟ-exclaimed-about=1ᴍɪɴI
nc.nzlu
kc
yrpla-tr-ngr=Ø
nar=mq
mz-tu=pe=Ø
tree.coconut
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
bang-Gᴅɪʀ.in-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴIS head=2ᴍɪɴII
die-stand=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘I told him, “I exclaimed about the coconut tree which banged your head being dead.”’
(30.17)

Nouns with either direct or indirect possession
The possessive system of Natqgu makes a distinction between nouns which are directly
possessed—with no morphology between the noun and possessor—and those which are indirectly
possessed by use of a morpheme meaning ‘of’ or ‘belonging to’. The directly possessed noun
class is primarily composed of inalienable relationships like body parts and many kinship terms.

11

When the possessor is an enclitic, it attaches to the possessed noun itself for direct possession and
by use of a possessive classifier to which the enclitics are attached for indirect possession. More
details are given in §3.6 on possessives.
a) mrlx ncblo
b) doa ncblo

c) doa ne
ncblo
son man

child man

child ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl man
‘man’s son’

‘male child’

‘man’s child’
Noun-noun sequences can seem ambiguous with regard to whether the relationship is
possessive or attributive. Compare the forms in (15), in which (a) is a directly possessed noun, (b)
is attributive, and (c) is a possessive using one of the possessive classifiers.
3.3 Nominalized, derived, and complex nouns
Natqgu has seven strategies for deriving complex nouns as delineated in the subsections below:
§3.3.1) the subordinator for participant nominalization, §3.3.2) a circumfix action nominalization,
§3.3.3) a proprietive suffix signaling ‘having the property of X’, §3.3.4) an adjectival verb prefix,
§3.3.5) compounding, §3.3.6) animate/human and inanimate descriptive nominal phrases, and
§3.3.7) a prefix for group/place membership of animate/human participants.
All of these exhibit indirect possession.

Participant nominalization with subordinator kx
Participant nominals are formed using the subordinator kx which in one of its subordinating
functions changes a verb into a doer of the verb. This can be further modified with other
morphemes as illustrated by the singular forms in (16), with the causative, passive, and an adverb
meaning ‘for free.’ Thus, the one who works is a worker, the one who causes work is an
employer, and the one who is caused to work by someone is either an employee or a slave and the
one who works for free is a volunteer.
a) kx-wz
b) kx-a-wz

c) kx-nz-a-wz
ѕᴜʙʀ- work
ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-work
ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴘᴀѕ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-work

‘worker’
‘employer’

‘employee, servant’

d) kx-nz-a-wz-nrbalq
e) kx-nz-wz-nrbalq
ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴘᴀѕ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-work-nothing
ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴘᴀѕ-work-nothing
‘slave’

‘volunteer’

Circumfix—action nominalization with nz- + -ngr
The most basic form of nominalization is an action nominalization formed by the addition of the
circumfix nz- plus -ngr, creating nouns like, ‘working,’ or ‘going,’ as in a) and b) of (17).
(a) nz-wz-ngr
(b) nz-vz-ngr

(c) nz-wz-kr=de
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-work- ɴᴍʟᴢ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-go-ɴᴍʟᴢ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-work-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ=2ᴍɪɴII
‘working’

‘going’

‘his working’
Natqgu makes frequent use of this strategy in forming subordinate clauses. Such nominalized
forms can also be possessed by substituting -kr ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ for -ngr and adding an indication of
possessor, either an enclitic pronominal from Table 4 as in (17c) or a simple noun or NP.

Secondary nominalization of verbs with -nr
Certain nominalized forms can undergo further permutations, which maintain their status as
nouns. The addition of the middle prefix r- changes one instance of the nominalization into its
generic or habitual practice, giving nzrwzngr ‘habitual working’. This prefix is discussed in §7.2.
Some such forms can be further modified by the addition of a second nominalizer, -nr
ɴᴍʟᴢ2, between the verb root and -ngr. The form maintains its nominal category but looks at the
nominalized action as an entire event, with a resultant reading being ‘the characteristic of’ the
nominalized verb. This is illustrated in (18) with kcmnz ‘covet’.

12

nz-kcmnz-ngr nz-r-kcmnz-ngr nz-r-kcmnz-nr-ngr
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-covet-ɴᴍʟᴢ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-covet-ɴᴍʟᴢ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-covet-ɴᴍʟᴢ2- ɴᴍʟᴢ
‘coveting’ [instance] ‘coveting’ [habitual] ‘covetousness’ [habitual characteristic]

Nominalization of stative verbs with z-
Natqgu preserves 38 attested nominalizations of stative verbs denoting properties, which are
formed with the prefix z-. This prefix appears not to be productive, since younger speakers reject
some less common nominalizations which the older speakers find acceptable and still use.
Examples of this type of nominalization are shown in (19). Note though, that when these nouns
are possessed or occur in more complex phrases, they revert to the circumfix nominalization
strategy in §3.3.2.
(a) z-bao
(b) z-blqki
(c) z-mrlz

(d) z-ngya'

ɴᴍʟᴢ-be.cold ɴᴍʟᴢ-be.dirty ɴᴍʟᴢ-be.good
ɴᴍʟᴢ-be.angry
‘coldness’ ‘dirtiness’ ‘goodness’ ‘anger’

Noun-noun compounds
Some nouns are formed by simple noun-noun juxtaposition, such as be-lue ‘water container’
formed from ‘skin’ and ‘water’ see previously in example (7).

Attributive phrasal nouns
Complex nouns are also formed using attributive phrases as demonstrated below in (20a) and
(20b). In (20a) the final form is a noun, as it is in (20b). But note in (20b) that there is a further
attributive noun ‘those who are sick’ inside the larger phrase, as described in §3.3.1. I analyze
these as complex nouns rather than NPs because modifiers cannot be inserted in the sequence, but
the sequence can be modified with following modifiers and can also be moved as a unit. See
example (64) where lcsukxlvc ‘flying ship (airplane)’ is modified by lcdeng ‘those’, rather than
saying, lcsu lcdeng kxlvc.
(a) mangönëköka'ngö

(b) ma-nyë-kä-në-yagoä-ng
ma-ngr-nz-krka'-ngr

ma-nyz-kx-nz-yagox-ng
house-ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ- ɴᴍʟᴢ-pray-ɴᴍʟᴢ

house-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ-ѕᴜʙʀ-3ᴀᴜɢ1-sick=3ᴀᴜɢIS
‘house for praying’ (church)

‘house of those who are sick’ (hospital)

person/people belonging to a place or group
lr-
Natqgu also has a toponymic form lr- ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ, which precedes a toponym, that is, a noun denoting
a place or ethnicity, and derives a noun which categorizes the group as a whole or a member of
that group. Orthographically, speakers decided lr- should be written separate from the noun it
modifies, since often the modified noun is a proper noun, and writing them separately allowed for
capitalization of the proper noun itself, rather than capitalizing lr- wherever it occurred. It is,
however, a bound morpheme. Note that in (21) the single instance of lr- has scope over the names
of two villages.
…doa lö Nepa' ä Pa'lë sâ tëmâpäpelö ninge kä nanginibo käaonöwä më mëtea lâng li.
doa
lr Nepa' x
Pa'lz
sc=
tz-mcpx=pe=lr ninge
person ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
Nepa' and
Pa'lz
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-choose=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA
be=1ᴍɪɴII
kx
na-ngini-bz=x kx-a-o-nrwx mz
mztea lc-ng
li
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-become- Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-go-peace ᴘʀᴇᴘ
village ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
two
‘…the people of Nepa' and Pa'lz villages chose me that I might become a peacemaker for
those two villages.’ (71.01)
This is identical in form with the possessive classifier encoding associative relationships
§3.6.2, that is, things which are closely associated. Since people are closely associated with the
place they live, it might seem that these two forms could be merged. However, the TPNYM usage

13

only applies to places inhabited by humans and can occur with just the toponym following and no
preceding noun, as in lr Japan ‘the Japanese.’ But the PCLF requires a noun prior to lr, as in nqvi
lr Menesa' ‘Menesa'’s (ancestral) line’. Both forms, though, co-occur with da ‘thing’ yielding
forms like dalr Inglan ‘thing-ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ England’ referring to people from England in spite of ‘thing’
and dalr trau scgr ‘thing-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.assoc our money.’
3.4 Demonstratives
Unlike other Oceanic languages with three degrees of distance (Lynch, Ross and Crowley 2002),
the basic Natqgu demonstrative system is a two-by-two grid as shown in Table 5. Using terms
from Alfarano (2021:212-224), the consonants l- and k- signal ‘listener anchored’ and ‘speaker
anchored’ respectively, where either the listener or the speaker is the deictic anchor for the
discourse. The vowels a and c signal whether the modified noun is near (proximal) or far (distal)
based on time, space, or discourse parameters. Frequently, kc functions as a subordinator or
relativizer, replacing kx in a sentence. The other demonstratives have this function less
frequently. See the form kcng in example (10) and further discussion in §3.7.2.

Simple Demonstratives

proximal
distal
listener anchored
la
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴘʀᴏx lc
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
speaker anchored
ka
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴘʀᴏx kc
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
All of the simple demonstratives can co-occur with other morphemes, as laid out in the
position class chart in Table 6. The columns in parentheses are optional. These forms take the
basic meaning of the simple demonstratives and add an additional piece of information with each
morpheme, such as plurality of the modified noun in the +3 column. Column -1 is the slot for
morphemes being modified, that is nouns and pronominal prefixes, the locative morpheme mr,
the relative pronoun kr-, the anaphoric reference prefix de-, and the indefinite pronominal prefix
ne-. All four simple demonstratives co-occur with de-, which refers back to a previously
mentioned nominal, yielding meanings like ‘that’s how,’ ‘that’s why,’ ‘that’s all,’ ‘that’s who,’
‘that’s the one,’ and so forth. Only =lc and =kc co-occur with ne-, which also occurs in the form
neke ‘who’ in combination with the relative pronominal suffix -ke.7 Discussion of other
limitations on the combinations of forms is beyond the scope of this grammar sketch, but not all
combinations are equally possible.

Affixes combining with demonstratives
-1
0
(+1)
(+2)
(+3)
(+4)
prefixes
ᴅᴇᴍ
specifier
person/# or state
plural
restrictive
noun
=la

=pe ᴄᴏѕ
-ng(q) ᴘʟ
=pwz ‘just’
mr- ʟᴏᴄ
=lc
-monr ᴅᴇɪᴄ
=pnz ᴄᴍᴘʟ

kr- RPRN
=ka

=le ~ =de 3MIN

de- ANA
=kc
-ma ѕᴘᴇᴄ

ne- ‘who’

In column +1, -monr, means the entity which is being pointed at physically, and is
glossed ᴅᴇɪᴄ. It has a restricted distribution and only occurs with =lc, giving a meaning like ‘that
one there’. It does not occur in the SGM text. The second form which can fill the +1 slot is, -ma,
which only co-occurs with =kc. It is immediately preceded by the specific noun already
established in the discourse and is glossed ѕᴘᴇᴄ. Its function is to track participants in a discourse.
When other nouns have been mentioned in the discourse, kcma reintroduces a previously
mentioned noun which is returning to focus in the discourse (§11).

7 The relative pronominal suffix –ke is identical in form with an interrogative –ke. Some speakers only use neke
in an interrogative sense, while others use it both as an interrogative ‘who?’ and as a relative ‘he who’.

14

The optional forms in column +2 of Table 6 are =pe ‘change of state’ and either of the
third person minimal forms, meaning the entity pointed to by the demonstrative. The addition of
=pe or =pnz increases the specificity or definiteness of a phrase, as in the difference between mzli
kc ‘that time’ and mzli kcpe ‘that very time.’ Depending on the temporal setting of the discourse
the addition of the enclitic aspect markers can also signal that the noun modified already exists or
has existed in the past. The single morpheme in the +3 column is the plural marker. Likewise,
only one form occurs in the +4 column, and that is the restrictive enclitic =pwz which means
‘just,’ ‘only,’ or ‘exactly.’
There are constraints on what combinations actually occur, the discussion of which is
outside the scope of this write up. The simple and complex demonstratives are highly frequent,
with nearly one per sentence in connected discourse, and with kc far outnumbering the other
demonstratives.
3.5 Numerals and number-marking

Cardinals
The Natqgu numerals follow an ‘imperfect decimal system’ (Lynch 2009) composed of two sets
of five, as illustrated by the numbers one through ten in Table 7. The numbers six through nine
are formed by compounds using the numbers one through four, while the number ten receives a
non-derived, non-compounded form.
In composing more complex numbers, the first step is to divide the tens from the single
digit numbers by use of nrade ‘its fruit’ which joins the two halves of the number. Similarly,
nrbalq ‘freely’ is added to divide the hundred thousands from the numbers less than one hundred,
as illustrated in the contrast between 100,045 and 145,000 near the end of column two. For
million and billion,8 there are no complex numbers attested having anything but zero in the last
six or more slots, as for example, in 200 billion. Practically speaking, numbers in the thousands
would be the highest used for their numerical value, while million and billion are probably closer
to ‘exceedingly uncountable’ and ‘even more exceedingly uncountable,’ similar to the way some
English speakers use ‘gazillion.’

Natqgu Numeral System
1
esz' ~ tesz' (when counting) 20
nzpnu-li
2
li
100
trtqki ~ trtqki-esz'
3
tq
200
trtqki-li
4
pwx
759
trtqki-rlimz-nzpnu-nzlvqn-nrade-rpwxmz
5
nzlvqn
1000
siu siu-esz'
6
esz'mz
8,263
siu-rtqmz-trtqki-li-nzpnu-esz'mz-nrade-tq
7
rlimz
100,045
siu-trtqki-esz'-nrbalq-nzpnu-pwx-nrade-nzlvqn
8
rtqmz
145,000
siu-trtqki-esz'-nzpnu-pwx-nrade-nzlvqn
9
rpwxmz
million
nyrmz
10
nzpnu ~ nzpnu-esz'
million
nyrngc
11
nzpnu-esz'-nrade-esz'
billion
obu
12
nzpnu-esz'-nrade-li
200 billion
obu-trtqki-li
234,567
siu-trtqki-li-nzpnu-tq-nrade-pwx-nrbalq-trtqki-nzlvqn-nzpnu-esz'mz-nrade-rlimz
[thousand-((hundred-two)-((ten-three)-and-four))]-free-[(hundred-five)-((ten-six)-and-seven)]

8 The Commonwealth and US uses of ‘billion’ differ in the number of zeros involved. But that fact does not
come into play here, since the meanings of the Natqgu words are catch-all terms for large amounts and do not
refer to actual, specific numbers.

15

Even though the number 234,567 at the bottom of Table 7 is possible, it was elicited
specifically for this chart. It takes 15 syllables to articulate the numeral in English, but 31
syllables in careful speech in Natqgu. The length of the Natqgu numerals in combination with
extensive English contact through the educational system has made younger speakers of Natqgu
comfortable with English numeral vocabulary, while struggling to process complex numbers in
Natqgu. In light of this waning command of the numerals, it was refreshing to attend a church
business meeting in 2002 in which the entire treasurer’s report was presented in the vernacular,
including all the numbers. Even more significantly, the treasurer was from the youngest group of
speakers. He was so fluent that some middle-aged speakers struggled to process at the speed he
was speaking. Even though most speakers conduct mathematical calculations in English, this man
was an exception.
Natqgu Language Project (NLP) team members had also experienced this loss. In fact,
Mr. Simon, the oldest member, was the only one to fully command Natqgu numbers. In the local
Anglican churches, when the lectionary-assigned scriptures are read in public, the reader
announces the chapter and verses of the passage. When reading Natqgu, some speakers struggled
to articulate the numerals or came to us the night before to ask for help. To address this loss, the
NLP team decided to spell out all the longer cardinal numbers when they occurred in the scripture
text and to include Arabic numerals in parentheses. For the Psalms, ordinal numbers were printed
as the title; such as, Sam kra-nzpnu-li-nrade-esz'mz ‘Twenty-sixth Psalm.’

Ordinals
The form of the ordinals of Natqgu follows the majority of the world’s languages in having a
suppletive form for ‘first,’ with all subsequent ordinals being derived from their cardinal
counterparts (Stolz and Veselinova 2008). The prefix kra- is added before a cardinal numeral to
form its ordinal. The vowel combination is difficult to perceive in fast speech and many of the
youngest group of speakers have internalized this form as [kaa] or [ka].
There are two words for ‘first’ in Natqgu: kai which means first in time or prior to
something else and ayrnr which means first in importance. Sentence (22) uses both of them.
Vë-kaipo, a' kökâ navëm më nibönge, na-ayönöngö më ëmatü, muöde mnâ-pnë-kai më
ninge.
vz-kai-bz=x

a'
kr-kc

na-vz-mq=Ø

mz
go-first-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
but
ʀᴘʀɴ2-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ ɪʀʀ-go-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ

nibr=nge
na-ayrnr-ngr=Ø
mz
zmatq murde
back=1ᴍɪɴII
ɪʀʀ-first-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
power because
mnc=pnz-kai=Ø
mz
ni=nge
be=ᴄᴍᴘʟ-first=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
be=1ᴍɪɴII
‘I came first, but he who comes after me, he’s the one who must be premier-first in
power-authority, because he pre-existed me.’ (John 1:15)

Use of ‘two’ in the SGM text
An examination of 117 uses of li ‘two’ in the full SGM text gives the following uses: 68 times as
a predicate, 24 times in as nominal head of a noun phrase, 15 times as an ordinal number, seven
times as a cardinal number, twice adjectivally, and once within an idiom. The general distinction
between the inflected or uninflected forms follows an animacy and specificity hierarchy, such
that animate and specific nouns are modified using nzling, with its circumfix 3AUG forms, while
inanimate things are normally modified with a simple li. The few instances when animate nouns
are modified with li occurred when the referents were either generic or hypothetical. A discussion
of each of the possible forms is outside the scope of this grammar sketch, but they can be studied
by noting numerals as they occur in the text.

16

Nigö kä nëlutäpepwë nëpnu-ligö-nöade-li.
ni=gr
kx
nz-lu-tx=pe-pwz nzpnu-li=gr-nra=de-li
be=1ᴀᴜɢII
ѕᴜʙʀ
3ᴀᴜɢ-live-ɪɴᴛѕ=ᴄᴏѕ-just
ten-two=1ᴀᴜɢII-fruit=3ᴍɪɴII-two
'We who were the only ones living there were the twenty-two of us.’ (14.04)
The cardinal number in example (23) is of particular interest. In it, there’s a person and
number enclitic in the middle of the numeral, with the rest of the numeral following, rather than
=gr ‘us’ occurring at the end of the numeral where it might be expected. This is the only
occurrence in my data of anything intersecting a numeral. Together with the uses catalogued
above, this demonstrates the category fluidity of Natqgu’s numerals.

Non-numeral quantifiers
Non-numeral quantifiers fall into three classes. First, the quantifier amrlx ‘all’ as in (28) follows
the noun it modifies and co-occurs with true adjectives. Second, the quantifiers pipz ‘few’ (5a),
(170) and kqlu ‘many’ (155) require the subordinator kx, patterning like stative verbs. They
follow the noun they modify. A third non-numeral quantifier type is exhibited by two-morpheme
forms meaning ‘a/an’ and ‘some,’ composed of the bound attributor kz- as the first morpheme,
with either dq ‘indefinite singular’ or du ‘indefinite plural’ as the second morpheme. The
morphemes in the second slot also occur independently. These two quantifiers occur before the
noun they modify, as shown in sentences (39) and (46).
3.6 NP-level Possession
In this section, I discuss possessive constructions at the NP level. As noted in §3.2.4, Natqgu
nouns are either directly or indirectly possessed.

Direct possession
The directly possessed noun class is primarily composed of inalienable relationships like body
parts and many kinship terms. When the possessor is a noun or NP it immediately follows the
possessum (24a,b) and no pronominal enclitic is found on the directly possessed noun. In fact, the
construct would be ungrammatical with both. When the possessor is represented by a pronominal
enclitic, it attaches to the possessed noun (24c,d).
(a) nar ncblo

(b) nar Menapi
(c) nar=de
(d) drtq=de

head man

head PN

head= 3ᴍɪɴII name= 3ᴍɪɴII
‘man’s head’

‘Menapi’s head’
‘his head’ ‘his name’

Indirect possession
Indirectly possessed nouns precede their possessors, with an intervening genitive or possessive
classifier. The genitives encode things that may be part of something else or related in some other
way, but not necessarily having an ownership relationship. The possessive classifiers on the other
hand generally encode a closer relationship or responsibility, often ownership.
Comparatively, the other two Santa Cruz languages with published grammars have 14
possessive classifiers for Engdewu (Vaa 2013) and seven for Nalögo (Alfarano 2021), along with
the eight (or nine) I analyze below for Natqgu. These numbers are in the middle of the range of
Oceanic possessive systems, many of which have fewer than four classifiers, but others of which,
especially Micronesian languages and Oceanic languages of New Caledonia, have upwards of
twenty (Lichtenberk 1983, Dotte & Moyse-Faurie 2021).
There are two free genitives, ngr ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ and r ɢᴇɴ1ʙ, with r being a phonologically
conditioned variant of ngr which has become fixed in some constructions. The other bound form
in the genitive category is -kr, which serves as the second half of a circumfix in an action
nominalization and introduces the agent of the action. Like with genitives and other possessive
forms, -kr either combines with an enclitic or is followed by the possessor noun or NP.

17

These generic forms can be used as possessives, but also to indicate contents,
relationships, locations, or properties, as illustrated by the examples in the genitive section of
Table 8. The remainder of Table 8 shows the possessive classifiers, each of which encodes
various relations: handheld, betel nut, drink, food, responsibility, property, hearth, associative,
and feelings.

Genitives and Possessive Classifiers

Gloss
Meaning
Description
Examples
GEN

ngr
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
of, from,
genitive
Contents, relationships,
location & properties
zyzlr ngr nepi ‘light of the sun’
lue ngr dxbu ‘water of the lake’
r
ɢᴇɴ1ʙ
variant
Phonologically set,
resulting in deletion or
palatalization
olvz r=de → [olv(z)rde] ‘his wife’
esaki r be → [esakyr be] ‘end of story’
lzm r kai → [lzm r kai] ‘bowl of
pudding’
-kr
ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ

possessive of action
nominalizations
and a few other nouns
kave kr Sawa ‘Sawa’s cousin’
nqmq kr=de ‘his way’
nztulz-kr=de ‘his standing up’
PCLF

sc
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand
handheld
Handheld and moveable
possessions; can act as
generic possessor
tengz sc=nge ‘his comb’
nuzmu sc=de ‘his canoe’
kx-nz-rngi-sc=ng ‘the haves’
kx-tr-nz-rngi-sc-u=ng ‘the have nots’
ma
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.betel
betel nut
and related items, such as
leaf, lime, container
pxi ma Samwi ‘Samwi’s leaf’
kalva ma=de ‘his betel nut’
mq
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.drink
drinkables
including wet fruits, like
papaya and watermelon
tabao mq=nge ‘my papaya’
lue mq=m(q) ‘your water’
na
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.food
edibles
all food, except those
categorized as drinkable
nya na Ikai ‘Ikai’s taro (food)’
bia na=de ‘his breadfruit (food)’
ne
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl
underlings
ownership, creation, or
responsibility; refers to
children, animals, but not
spouse or deities
doa ne Saemon ‘Simon’s child’
poi ne=de-ng ‘his pigs’
nabz ne=nge ‘my song’ (I wrote)
nyz
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ
property
& time
immovable property
and time at a fixed point

ma nyz ile=nge ‘my sister’s house’
nrlanc nyz=de ‘his garden’
mzli nyz Noa ‘time of Noah’
mnr~
pnr
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.fire
hearth
& home
fire, firewood, blankets,
mats, hearth and home
nqni mnr=de ‘his mat’
nqni pnr Tina ‘Tina’s mat’
nabxbq pnr=nge ‘my firepit’
lr
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.assoc
associative closely associated with or
intrinsically part of
nqvi lr Samwi ‘Samwi’s line’ [family]
nivz lr lxe=de ‘love of his mother’
dzwr lr popz' ‘strength of the bow’
bq lr nounc ‘sap of a tree’
nr
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.feel
feelings
co-occurs only with
thoughts, heart, desires
nqmq nr drtwrde ‘his way of thinking’
nepu nr drtwrgu ‘our desire of thought’
These categories warrant further discussion. First, sc ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand is normally used for
handheld possessions which can be moved or carried, and for generic possession, as in the second
and third examples in the Table 8—‘the haves and the have nots.’ Younger speakers,9 aged 10-45

9 I have identified at least three generational age-lects in Natqgu (Boerger 2007:130, Boerger et al 2012:118). In
addition, the youngest speakers today are considerably less fluent than their predecessors at the same age. So as

18

use sc more frequently than older speakers over 45, considering it to be a generic classifier for all
items difficult to categorize. For example, older speakers prefer lr ᴘᴄʟꜰ.associative as the
possessive classifier for God’s love, but younger speakers use sc instead.
The classifier ne ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl categorizes two things—animate beings for which the
possessor is responsible and creations of the possessor, like songs, paintings, books, or crafts.
This differs from Nalrgo (Alfarano 2021:193) and Engdewu (Vaa 2013:227-228), where cognates
of ne require ‘animate’ possessums, but lack the created works usage.
The last possessive classifier in the table, nr ᴘᴄʟꜰ.feel, sits at the intersection of a genitive
‘of’ meaning and a possessive since it enables feelings to be possessed. That is, nr itself does not
take possessive enclitics, but instead they attach to drtwr ‘neck~thinking’ or nabz ‘insides~heart,’
one of which occurs in all expressions of thinking and feeling.
The remaining possessive classifiers are used similarly by all speakers. A canoe classifier,
identified by Vaa (2013) for Engdewu does not exist in Natqgu, since canoes are possessed using
sc. Buildings and grounds is abbreviated ‘B&G’ in the gloss for nyz ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ, categorizing
immovable possessions, such as houses, trees, and land.
Natqgu nouns are not assigned to just one classifier; instead the classifier selected
depends on how the noun is employed or its relationship to the possessor. See examples (25) and
(26), where ‘knife’ co-occurs with any of three classifiers and ‘taro’ with at least two. Similarly,
homonyms, like nabz ‘heart’ and ‘song’ in (27) can be disambiguated by the possessive
construction in which they occur.
(a) toki na=nge

(b) toki mq=nge (c) toki sc=nge
knife ᴘᴄʟꜰ.food=1ᴍɪɴII
knife ᴘᴄʟꜰ.drink=1ᴍɪɴII knife ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=1ᴍɪɴII
‘my eating knife’
‘my wet fruit knife’
‘my working-in-the bush knife’
(a) nya na=nge

(b) nya nyz=nge
taro ᴘᴄʟꜰ.food=1ᴍɪɴII
taro ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=1ᴍɪɴII
‘my taro to eat’
‘my taro in my garden’
(a) nabz=nge

(b) nabz
ne=nge
heart=1ᴍɪɴII

song
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl=1ᴍɪɴII
‘my heart’

‘my song (I wrote)’
Lichtenberk (1983:167) claims that if kinship nouns are used with possessive classifiers,
“there is a tendency for the general classifier (if the language has one) rather than any other to be
used so.” This does not hold across the board for Natqgu, since as we saw in (15c), the
responsibility classifier ne is used with doa ‘child,’ and not a general classifier. However, a
general classifier is used in the husband and wife relationship, presumably since the relationship
can be severed by divorce or death. In counterpoint to this, all in-law terms are directly possessed,
as in (28), reflecting the cultural reality that the people who become in-laws through marriage
remain in-laws even after divorce or death, and the in-law cultural taboos remain, as well.
kzdo=nge
in.law=1ᴍɪɴII
my (male) in-law of a female
3.7 Adjectives and nominal modifiers
Natqgu exhibits multiple ways to modify nouns: a) a small set of mono-morphemic true
adjectives §3.7.1, b) subordinated verbs, especially stative verbs, functioning as adjectives §3.7.2,
c) a proprietive suffix (Lichtenberk 2009) changing a noun to an adjective 3.7.3, and d) word
order positional modification with no morphology as seen previously in (15b) and illustrated
again in §3.7.4.

long as there are elderly speakers in their 70s and older, there are four age-lects in Natqgu, each from 15 to 20
years long.

19

Six simple adjectives
Syntactically, there are only a handful of simple adjectives in Natqgu. These are defined as those
which immediately follow the noun they modify without the use of the subordinator and with no
intervening morphemes. The six adjectives which fill this role are amrlx ‘all,’ angidr ‘true,’ dau
‘main,’ drlr ‘wild,’ txne ‘lowly,’ and zpwx ‘real,’ as illustrated by the sentences below.
Yölübële dölëdöng amölä.
yrlq-bz=le
drlz=dr-ngq
amrlx
put-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
colour=3ᴀᴜɢII-ᴘʟ all
‘He made all their colors.’ (08.13)
Vë-nüblüle da angidö.

Vz-nqblq=le
da angidr
go-follow=3MINI
thing true
‘He follows the truth.’

Pwökilvâ-ngögö nëälö-kögö kä lö Japan sâ tëmnâpeng Tulëgi, mëteadau ngö Solomon.
pwrkilvc-ngr=gr
nz-xlr-kr=gr
kx
lr Japan
startled-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-hear-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
Japan
sc= tz-mnc=pe=ng Tulzgi

mztea-dau
ngr Solomon
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-be=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS
Tulagi
village-main ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
Solomon Islands
‘We were shocked from our hearing that the Japanese were staying at Tulagi, the
capital of Solomon Islands.' (36.03)
Mwa'-ti=le poi dölö.
mwa'-ti=le

poi
drlr
hunt-TRNS=3ᴍɪɴIA
pig
wild
‘He is hunting for wild pigs.’
…nëapä-ngöbë badö doa känëtopwë ä nâblo täne nëdwatö-ködö ma kâ.”
nz-apx-ngr-bz
ba=dr
doa
kx-nz-topwz
ᴘᴀѕ-restrict-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII
child
ѕᴜʙʀ-3ᴀᴜɢ-little and
x
ncblo
txne
nz-dwatr-kr=dr ma
kc
and
man lowly
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-enter-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ=3ᴀᴜɢII house
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘…it is forbidden for small children and lowly men to enter that building.’ (04.02)

Muöde nëmu mnâ-ëpwäkö mölâde më nëvë-köm dävo ä nöâ käpötë käoda.
murde
nzmu mnc-zpwx=kr mr-lc=de

mz
because
if
stay-real=1ᴀᴜɢI ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
ᴘʀᴇᴘ

nz-vz-kr-mq

dxvo x nrc kx-prtz=Ø
kx-oda=Ø
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-go-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither tsunami and wave ѕᴜʙʀ-enter=3ᴍɪɴIS
ѕᴜʙʀ-destroy=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘Because we might have been really safe there in the coming of the tsunami and the
intrusive, destructive waves.’ (16.10)
Note in (34) that the italicized adjectival forms combine with the subordinator kx, as
described next in 3.7.2.

Adjectives with subordinator kx
The above set of syntactically simple adjectives is typologically interesting because in Where
Have All the Adjectives Gone? Dixon (2010c:3-4) finds that other languages having small
adjective classes normally include some variation of the following pairs in that set: large/small,
long/short, new/old, good/bad, black/white, and red/green (unripe).
While Natqgu has these semantic concepts, syntactically they are encoded by stative
verbs, requiring the subordinator kx for their adjectival use as in:
kxetu ‘large’
kxtopwz ‘small’

20

kxboi ‘long’
kxmrbc ‘short’
kxmrna ‘new’ kxblzlo ‘old’
kxbo ‘black’
kxprki ‘white’
kxpc ‘red’
kxmqbq ‘green, unripe’

This form: NP + subordinator kx + (be)verb is by far most common adjectival strategy in
Natqgu. It was illustrated earlier with non-stative verbs by the last two words in sentence (34)
describing the intrusive, destructive waves, (bolded and italicized). The demonstrative kc
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ can be substituted for the subordinator kx (Lynch et al. 2002:53, Early 2009), when the
nominal is definite and already introduced in the discourse; see kcng in example (10).

The proprietive: subordinated verbs functioning adjectivally
Natqgu derives stative verbs from nouns using -ngr ᴘʀᴏᴘ ‘proprietive’ indicating the noun is
‘with or has something’ (Haspelmath 2008, Lichtenberk 2009); here, the property of something.
These can, in turn, serve in adjectival roles as in (35) and (36).
Animol kä-në-topwë=ng në-mnâ-kapü-ne=ng me öplë-ngö.
Animol kx-nz-topwz=ng
nz-mnc-kapq-ne=ng me
rplz-ngr
animal ѕᴜʙʀ-3ᴀᴜɢ-small=3ᴀᴜɢIS 3ᴀᴜɢ-stay-hide-ᴅѕᴛʀ=3ᴀᴜɢIS place stone-ᴘʀᴏᴘ
‘Small animals hide around in the rocky places.’ (Psalm 104:18)

Këdü ëbü tötenge ä Menabë nëabëlö bona kä nâblongö li.
kz-dq
zbq
trte=nge
x
Menabz
nz-a-bz=lr
ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ day
father=1ᴍɪɴII
and
Menabz
3ᴀᴜɢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-die=3ᴀᴜɢIA

bona
kx
ncblo-ngr
li
pigeon
ѕᴜʙʀ
man-ᴘʀᴏᴘ
two
'One day my father and Menabz killed two male pigeons.’ (07.01)

Modification by nouns
Another modification strategy has the head noun followed directly by a word which could also
fill a noun slot, but which serves as a noun modifier. Compare doa ncblo ‘male child’ in (15b)
with gout kx ncblongr ‘male goats’ in (36). The animacy hierarchy (Comrie 1981:38) accounts
for the fact that humans and animals are modified differently.

Comparatives & superlatives
There are no unique morphemes to express comparatives and superlatives. However, the
sequence of a geometric directional and a personal directional serves this function, as shown in
the forms in (37) based on etu ‘be.big’. The morphemes -px + -bz ‘out-go’ in (37a) add the
comparative and the addition of the intensifier -tx (37b) makes it even more so. Then in (37c) the
superlative is understood by the addition of zlwz ‘very/much’.
Bigger, much bigger, biggest
(a) etu-px-bz

(b) etu-tx-px-bz

(c) etu-tx-px-zlwz-bz
be.big-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.yon be.big-ɪɴᴛѕ-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.yon be.big-ɪɴᴛѕ-Gᴅɪʀ.out-much-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
‘bigger’

‘much bigger’

‘biggest’
To make comparisons more explicit, the verb mya ‘miss, surpass’ is used with a geometric
directional (in, out, up, down) to say in what dimension the comparison is being made. The
example in (38) is a long NP, part of a list of things people showed Prince Philip when he visited
in 1959 and has a superlative sense, even with just -px + -bz. Part of the meaning, then, is from
context.

21

Dalö nëelangö më nelâ, kâ tüngi nëelangö kämyapäbë möka Sada Krus.
da-lr
nz-ela-ngr

mz nelc
kc
tq-ngi=Ø
things-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.assoc ɴᴍʟᴢ1-dance-ɴᴍʟᴢ dance ᴘʀᴇᴘ nosepiece
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-be=3ᴍɪɴIS
nz-ela-ngr

kx-mya-px-bz=Ø

mr-ka
Sada Krus
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-dance-ɴᴍʟᴢ
ѕᴜʙʀ-surpass-Pᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIS
ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴘʀᴏx
Santa Cruz
‘Things for dancing with the nose shell, which is the most important dance here on
Santa Cruz.’ (62.11)
3.8 Basic Noun Phrase Structure
A Natqgu noun phrase (NP) is formed by a head noun and its following modifiers, if any. Simple
nouns and free pronouns, plus the complex nominal forms from 3.3 can all function as NP heads.
Relative pronouns can also be heads, and are formed with a pronominal relativizer plus a
demonstrative. Some examples follow.

Nouns as NP heads
Simple nouns can function as NP heads. Sentence (39) illustrates this with three head nouns. The
first NP is the complex one in square brackets, ‘the child I was always a twosome with,’ and the
noun doa ‘child’ is its head. The second NP is headed by the noun drtq ‘name’ which is modified
by the possessive enclitic ‘his.’ Lastly, the third NP in the sentence is headed by a bare noun, the
proper name Lrlvz.
…këdü doa kä line-ëvëkö nâdö dötüde Lölvë.
[kz-dq
doa
kx
li-ne-zvz=kr ncdr]
drtq=de Lrlvz.
ᴀᴛ- ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
child
ѕᴜʙʀ
two-ᴅѕᴛʀ -always=1ᴀᴜɢI ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴅᴜ name=3ᴍɪɴII
Lrlvz.
‘…a kid I was always a twosome with is named Lrlvz.’ (03.01)

Nominalizations as NP heads
Action nominalizations also function as heads. Sentence (40) illustrates two action
nominalizations as NP heads. The first of these is ‘believing’ with no morphology other than the
circumfix nominalizer and the middle indicating it is on-going. The other nominalization in
square brackets, ‘our trusting God,’ is a complex construction and it is possessed. The idiom ‘to
make one’s neck ripe’ means ‘to trust in.’
…ä ökatöpü bagö nëölängitingö ä nëabötö-köbëkö dötwögö më Gât.
x
r-ka-tr-mq=Ø
ba=gr
nz-r-lxngi-ti-ngr
and
ᴍɪᴅ-give-Gᴅɪʀ.in-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-lean-ᴛʀ-ɴᴍʟᴢ
x
[nz-a-br-tr-kr-bz=kr
drtwr=gr mz
Gct]
and
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-ripe-Gᴅɪʀ.in-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI neck=1ᴀᴜɢII ᴘʀᴇᴘ
God
‘…and it caused our believing and our trusting in God.’ (40.08)
Similarly, sentence (41) illustrates a participant nominal ‘the sick’ as the head of the bracketed NP
‘the sick in our village.’
…, këdü ëbü Dâkta dötwöde vëtä ä yönitä kë, muöde nëmâ-köde känëyagoäng më
mëtea nyëgö, a' töpnëngö medesin kä naokatö-ngöde nidö.
kz-dq
zbq
dckta
drtwr=de
vz-tx=Ø x

ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
day
doctor mind=3ᴍɪɴII
feel.sad-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
and
yrni-tx-kz=Ø
murde nz-mc-kr=de
[kx-nz-yagox=ngq
cry-ɪɴᴛѕ-also=3ᴍɪɴIS because ɴᴍʟᴢ1-see-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ-3ᴀᴜɢ-sick=3ᴀᴜɢIS
mz mztea
nyz=gr,]
a' trpnzngr
medesin
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
village
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=1ᴀᴜɢII,
but none medicine

kx na-okatr-ngr=de nidr
ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-help-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII be=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘…one day the doctor was very sad and cried intensely, because of his seeing the sick in
our village, but having no medicine from which he might help them.’ (20.04)

22

Free pronouns as NP heads
Sentence (42) shows the use of free pronouns (see Table 6) as heads, as shown by ninge ‘I/me’
and nigr ‘we/us’.
Zbë këdü doa lö Isabel dötüde Daniel Dani ä ninge tüpipem Bisop bagö kä nigö kä
navëbë më Mr Lore.
zbz
kzdq
doa
lr Isabel drtq=de
Daniel Dani
x
so.then
a
child
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
Isabel name=3ᴍɪɴII
Daniel Dani
and
ni=nge
tq-pi=pe-m
bisop
ba=gr
kx
ni=gr
be=1ᴍɪɴII
ʀʟ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-2ᴍɪɴII
bishop ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ѕᴜʙʀ
be=1ᴀᴜɢII
kx na-vz-bz=Ø
mz
Mr
Lore
ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-go-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
Mr
Lore
‘Then a guy from Isabel named Daniel Dani and I, the Bishop told us that we were the
ones who should go to Mr. Lore.’ (53.19)

Relative pronouns as NP heads
The prefix kr- combines with any of the simple demonstratives to form a relative pronoun, as
illustrated by the form krkc ‘that which’ in sentence (43). It is the head of the clause ‘that which
the tsunami uprooted.’
Nëmnâng më ma ngö takes kämöna kä nëtekütöngö kökâ tüyöwilä dävo.
nz-mnc=ngq
mz
ma ngr takes
kx-mrna
kx

3ᴀᴜɢ-be=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
house
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
tax
ѕᴜʙʀ-new
ѕᴜʙʀ

nz-tekqtr-ngr
kr-kc tq-yrvi-lx
dxvo
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-exchange-ɴᴍʟᴢ ʀᴘʀɴ2-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ ʀʟ-pull.out-out.away.from
tsunami
‘They lived in the new tax house replacing that which the tsunami uprooted.’ (19.17)
4. The Verb Complex and Verb Stem Creation
The Natqgu verb complex (Wurm 1992) is comprised of a verb core, defined as the simple root or
complex stem, with a possible four pre-core and twenty-one post-core modifiers. It is defined as
encompassing all material between and including the circumfix negator, as well as the aspect
proclitic that precedes the first part of the negative circumfix. The core itself is composed
minimally of a simple root, but can be modified by compounding to form a stem, as described in
§4.2. The post-core ordered slots are comprised of four types of adverbs, two types of
directionals, multiple valency changing suffixes, subject and object enclitics, a
reflexive/reciprocals slot, a few miscellaneous slots, ending with the second part of the circumfix
negative. A review of the data required to delineate and isolate these slot positions is beyond the
scope of this work. It involved comparing the placement of affixes in relation to one another and
finding labels to assign to morphemes which filling the same slot. Where possible, I identify the
ProtoOceanic (POc) source for the morphemes under discussion, especially when considering the
valency-changing morphology.
An individual word does not use every possible slot. Rather, all four pre-core slots can be
filled, while the most post-core slots found filled to date is eight. For example, in the verb word
of (44) the core krlz ‘reach’ has two pre-core morphemes and three post-core morphemes. The
word is bounded by the circumfix negators.
…më dötwögö tönakölëpüleu Solomon.

mz drtwr=gr
tr-na-krlz-mq=le-u

Solomon
ᴘʀᴇᴘ neck=1ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴇɢ-ɪʀʀ-reach-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA-ɴᴇɢ
Solomon Islands
‘…in our thinking it wouldn't reach the Solomons.’ (35.21)
4.1 Pre-core slots
The four pre-core slots -4 proclitic aspect, -3 circumfix negative A, -2 mood, -1 causative or
middle are shown in Table 9. Circumfix negation of slots -3 and +21 were illustrated by tr>…<u

23

of sentence (44). Proclitic aspect and mood are illustrated in sentence (45) where sc= ‘perfective’
fills the aspect slot and tq- ‘realis’ fills the mood slot. The orthographic convention is to write
proclitic aspect as a single word. That practice is followed here so that orthographic first lines
match up with the morphemes and glosses. It should be kept in mind though, that grammatically
it is a clitic and might more accurately be attached to the following morpheme.
…akiokö dëu öde tü, ä sâ tüwäbu-ngalelvëpekö dëu kâng tü.
aki-o=kr dzu
r=de tq

distribute-Gᴅɪʀ.down=1ᴀᴜɢI
portion ɢᴇɴ1ʙ=3ᴍɪɴII
three

x
sc=
tq-wxbu-ngale-lvz=pe=kr
dzu kcng
tq
and ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-sit-around-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI
portion those
three
'…we distributed them into three portions, and we sat around the three portions.' (45.05)
The final pre-core slot, is filled by the causative prefix a- or the middle prefix r-, which are
mutually exclusive.10 They are discussed in §5 and §6, with detailed examples in §7 on valency.

Pre-core slots of the Natqgu verb complex
-4
aspect
proclitic
-3
negation
prefix
-2
mood

-1
causative or
middle
0
verb
root
sc= PFV
tr> NEG
tq- RL
a- CAUS

sa= IPFV

tz- RL.3AUG
r- MID

ma= ‘lest’

na- IRR

nz- 3AUG

4.2 The verb core
The Natqgu verb core is filled by a single verbal root (Vroot) morpheme in the zero slot, which
may be either free or bound. Its simplest form is an imperative with no further morphology. The
verbal root can become a stem by filling the +1 compounding slot, yielding {Vroot+x}. Nothing
can intervene between the zero slot of the verb root and the +1 compounding slot. This
formulation allows us to more clearly categorize full set of complex verb stems, as laid out in
Table 10. This is similar to what François proposes for Mwotlap (2005:139-140).
The compounding slot +1 is distinct from the core applicative slot of +2 because such
applicatives can follow a complex stem. That is, these two means of modification near the verb
core cannot be felicitously combined into only one slot. If the slots were combined and multiple
items from the compounding slot were allowed to modify a verb, then there would be nothing to
constrain which of the elements could co-occur; keeping them separate provides this constraint.
Many of these stems presumably originated historically in serial verb constructions (Næss
& Boerger 2008) of the type {V+V}. But synchronically, while the first slot in Natqgu is filled by
either a free or bound verb root, the second slot shows variety, allowing bound and free verbs, as
well as bound adverbs, and even a noun.
Example (a) shows a prototypical serial verb construction with two free verb morphemes.
Examples (b), (c), and (d) referencing the SGM text, show variations on this where one or the
other or both verbs in the V-V sequence is bound. Example (e) demonstrates a bound adverb in
the +1 slot, which can be filled by a number of morphemes. The final form in (f) has a noun in the
second slot, giving it an adverbial sense. It is uncommon, in that it tells how someone was
speaking. Further verbal morphology attaches to the simple verb root or the complex stem.

10 The seven or so verbs which appear to have causative + middle are actually the causative plus a verb root
which begins with <r>.

24

Natqgu core and verb stem creation

0
Vroot
+1
compounders
examples
text
reference
a
V
V
lu-blc-tr 'pierce-jump in'
pierce-jump-Gᴅɪʀ.in
ntu-011-2004-writ-
nar-bhb-00711
b
V
Vbound
lu-nge-o-mq=le 'it jabbed a hole in it'
spear-make.hole-Gᴅɪʀ.down-ᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
11.30
c
Vbound
V
wx-bu-o-ngr-mq ncblo 'man sat on it'
sit-fold-Gᴅɪʀ.down-Pᴅɪʀ.hither man
06.08
d
Vbound
Vbound
pla-mri-lz-mq=le ‘he breaks stick-like obj’
break-stick-Gᴅɪʀ.up-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
11.25
e
V
ADVbound
ka-dwzlr-ngr-m 'repay'
give-back-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
Matthew 18:28
f
V
N
ycmne-zngya'-bz 'speak angrily'
speak-anger- Pᴅɪʀ.yon
Psalm 2:5

Core applicatives, slot +2
Nothing can come between the +2 core applicatives (CAPPL) and the verb root or stem, whichever
is in play. These are in opposition to -ngr, which is the single peripheral applicative, occurring
near the end of the verb complex. There are nine CAPPL forms, which in all my earlier work (see
references) I labeled the +2 slot as ‘unpaired directionals.’ The only change here is that the label
is different and ‘applicative’ acknowledges that the CAPPL forms can license an additional
argument, even though they do not necessarily do so. This label also parallels the description of
Nalögo by Alfarano (2021), making the two languages easier to compare. These forms are
presented further in §7.3, giving examples of both their applicative and non-applicative functions.
4.3 Post-core slots
The post-core slots +2 through +21 are filled by the categories described next, and illustrated by
Table 11. Forms in the table without a dash - or equals = are free morphemes which can occur
outside the verb complex. For all categories except adverbs the full set of potential forms is listed.
Forms listed twice, such as -mi in slots +2 and +10, along with -ani ‘quickly’ in slots +3 and +9,
can be found in both positions. Though rare, ani ‘be.quick’ can also occur as an independent
verb. I would posit then, that its +3 slot might actually be a +1 verb compounder and that
otherwise it occurs in +9 telling to what degree something happened. Further study is needed. For
a list of subject and object enclitics of +19 and +20, see Table 4.

Natqgu post-core verb complex slots
+2 core
APPL
+3 adv
manner
+4
TR
+5
INTS
+6
DSTR
+7
GDIR
+8
RECP/REFL
+9 adv
degree
+10
DPV B
+11 adv
qualifier
-c ‘across’
-ani
‘quickly’
-ti TR
-tx
-ne
-lz ‘up’
-etr RECP
-ani
‘quickly’
-mi
-alzu
‘instead’
-ki ‘path’
-kato
‘forcefully’
-ti PLCT

-o ‘down’
-lzbq REFL
-atwrnr
‘wholly’

-zpwx
‘true’
-lvz
‘about’
-rbr
‘wrongly’

-px ‘out’
-lxblr
‘together’
-rlru
‘far’

-angidr
‘real’
-plx
‘through
-lrpi
‘softly’

-tr ‘in’

-beka
‘aside’

11 Example (a) comes from a text in the Natqgu corpus (Boerger & Boerger, In progress). It is entitled, Mengalu
nibq nrc ‘Mengalu is killed by a wave,’ also written by Mr. Simon.

25

+12 adv
quantifier
+13
aspect
+14 adv
temporal
+15
also
+16
APPL
+17
PDIR
+18
restrictive
+19
subj
+20
obj
+21
NEG
zlwz
‘very/much’
=pe COS
mou ‘again’
kz ‘also’
-ngr
-bz ‘yon’
=pwz ‘just’

<u NEG
zvz
‘always’
=pnz CMPL
kai ‘first’

-mq ‘hither’

-alo
‘forever’
=be ‘still’

-nrbalq
‘nothing’
=ka ‘not yet’

Directionals, slots +7 and +17
The rare sentence lacks a directional. The Natqgu directionals occur in two categories, the
geometric directionals of slot +7 and the personal directionals of slot +17. The geometric
directionals (Gᴅɪʀ) occur with the meanings up, down, in, and out (Lober & Boerger 2009).
The personal directional (Pᴅɪʀ) -mq orients the action of the verb as being toward ‘hither’
the person in focus in the discourse, that is, the deictic center. It is likely a reflex of POc *mai
‘come.’ The other PDIR -bz orients the action away from the deictic center, and may be related to
either POc *lako ‘go to’ or *pano ‘go away’ (Lober & Boerger 2009). At the peak of a discourse,
directional use can shift from third person omniscient narrator to the first person point of view of
the main character (Boerger 2019).12 Only one Gᴅɪʀ and one Pᴅɪʀ is allowed per verb. Both
directional types are shown in sentence (46), with relevant forms in a bold font.
Kä mâpäm këdü lö kä mnâpäm më nâ nökö nâboi kâma, sâ lilvâtitäope-këpüle ä
mawitäde.
kx mc-px-mq kzdq
lr
kx
ѕᴜʙʀ see-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.hither a
sea.hawk
ѕᴜʙʀ
mnc-px-mq=Ø
mz nc.nrkr
ncboi
kc-ma

be-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ
tree.kwila
needlefish
that.one
sc= lilvcti-tx-o=pe-kz-mq=le x ma-wi-tx=de
ᴘꜰᴠ= swoop-ɪɴᴛѕ-Gᴅɪʀ.down=ᴄᴏѕ-also-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA and
bite-middle-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
‘When a sea hawk which lived in a Pacific teak tree [Intsia bijuga] saw that needle fish,
it also swooped right down and bit it in half.’ (11.09)13

Depictive -mi, slots +2 and +10
The suffix -mi ‘with’ occurs in slot +2, as well as slot +10. It is one of two morphemes found to
date which occurs in two slots. Unless there are numerous other post-core morphemes, it can be
unclear which slot is in use. Natqgu -mi has two functions. The first, shown in (47) has the sense
of ‘together with each other’ or even ‘in unison.’ These senses distinguish the first use of -mi
from -lxblr ‘together’ in slot +8. This use does not increase valency.
A second meaning ‘with’ is in (48). It increases valency to indicate the object. For this
use, the object being accompanied is inanimate or an animate participant who is subordinate to
the agent. A dual comitative ncdr ‘with’ and a plural comitative badr ‘with’ are used to join

12 I have not checked the 82 episodes of the SGM text to see if directional shift occurs in any of them. Since it is
told mostly in the first person, the point-of-view shift from third to first person is less likely to happen. There
are, however, several episodes in which he reports on activities of his friends where this could occur.
13 The underlined forms in this sentence also shows that that nc ‘tree’ (a shortened form of nounc ‘tree’) and nc
‘fish’ are homonyms which serve as categories for types of trees and fish. The NLP team decided to write the
tree names with a space between them and the fish names joined, but this is totally arbitrary to make reading
easier. There is also at least one name nc bq, which could be an Alexandrian laurel tree [Calophyllum
inophyllum] or a pompano fish [Alectis ciliaris] (Boerger et al 2019:122-23).

26

+animate NPs having equal social status (Næss et al. To appear.) Both uses of -mi are found in
both possible slots on the verb. See discussion in §7.3.8. Further research could predict how slot
assignments are made.
Këdu nidö nënemilö kä, “Lötëlvë kâ büpe döka'!”
kz-du
nidr
nz-ne-mi=lr
kx
ᴀᴛ- ɪɴᴅꜰ.ᴘʟ
be=3ᴀᴜɢII
3ᴀᴜɢ-scream-jointly=3ᴀᴜɢIA
ѕᴜʙʀ
lrtzlvz
kc
bq=pe drka'
elder
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
kill=ᴄᴏѕ demon
‘Some of them screamed together, “That old man, the devil killed him!”’ (11.28)
A' övëmim doa kä bletipä-läblöng më Sade kâng tüvë-ngömle.
a' r-vz-mi-mq=Ø
doa kx
ble-ti-px-lxblr-ngq
but ᴍɪᴅ-go-ᴅᴘᴠ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
person ѕᴜʙʀ
be.different-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.out-each-ᴘʟ
mz Sade kcng
tq-vz-ngr-mq=le
ᴘʀᴇᴘ Sunday those
ʀʟ-go-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
‘But he brings a different student [person/child] on those Sundays he comes.’ (30.03)

Adverbs, slots +3, +9, +11, +12, and +14
Manner adverbs fill slot +3, as in (49), where they precede the transitivizer -ti of slot +4. The
remaining adverb slots follow the geometric directionals. The degree adverb of slot +9 is shown
in (50). Qualifier adverbs as in (51) are in slot +11, and quantifier adverbs of slot +12 are shown
in (52). The temporal adverbs of slot +14 follow the enclitic aspect of slot +13 and are illustrated
in (53). Both temporal adverbs, mou ‘further, again, more’ and kai ‘first’ are independent
morphemes which also occur outside the verb complex, modifying an entire sentence or clause.
Nëdwa-öbö-lë-ngöm Këpten badö kru nedeng Aijë nëalängitikö ebio le mëli kâ më
öngalä.
nz-dwalz-rbr-lz-ngr-mq kzpten badr kru
3ᴀᴜɢ-get.up-wrong-Gᴅɪʀ.up-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
captain ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ crew
ne=de-ngq Aijz
nz-a-lxngi-ti-kr ebio=le
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl=3ᴍɪɴII-ᴘʟ Hygeia
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-lean-ᴛʀ-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ
sea.swell=3ᴍɪɴIP
mzli kc
mz
rngalx

time ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
dawn
‘The captain and his crew were rudely awoken on the Hygeia from the sea swell
making it tilt in the early morning.’ (19.02)
Sâ tüöpipebële badö kä, “Lolvëoamu waea la ä dwaâ-aniamu.”
sc= tq-r-pi=pe-bz=le ba=dr
kx
ᴘꜰᴠ= ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII
ѕᴜʙʀ
lolvz-o=amu waea la x
dwa-c-ani=amu
restrain-Gᴅɪʀ.down=2ᴀᴜɢI wire ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴘʀᴏx and
jump-across-quickly=2ᴀᴜɢI
‘He said to them, “Hold that wire down and jump over it quickly.”’ (42.14)
Yëlumâ, sâ tüöpimle kä naobülvëti-ëpwää mökâ ä napinemâ kä nâblo tülvö kä mnâ
mökâ.
yzlu-mq=x
sc=
tq-r-pi-mq=le kx
return-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ѕᴜʙʀ
na-obq-lvz-ti-zpwx=x
mr-kc
x
na-pi-ne-mq=x
ɪʀʀ-look-thruout-ᴛʀ-well=1ᴍɪɴI ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
and
ɪʀʀ-say-ᴅѕᴛʀ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=1ᴍɪɴI
kx
ncblo
tqlvr
kx
mnc
mr-kc
ѕᴜʙʀ man how.many
ѕᴜʙʀ
be
ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘I returned, then he said that I should look throughout there and I should say how many
men stayed there.’ (47.21)

27

Kä mwelö-ëlwëkö, sâ tüöpipem Käetu ö skul nadwapekö badö peto.
kx mwelr-zlwz=kr,
sc=
tq-r-pi=pe-mq
kxetu
r
ѕᴜʙʀ fear-much=1ᴀᴜɢI,
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
leader ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ

skul
na-dwa=pe=kr
badr peto
school
ɪʀʀ-jump=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI
ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ bush
‘Since we were very frightened, the Head of the school said to us we should go with
him to the bush.’ (37.09)
Më nëvë-ködö kâ nëobü-moupüng mü, a' nâ nëlu kâ möböpe tötupeu mökâ.
mz nz-vz-kr=dr
kc
nz-obq-mou-mq=ng
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-go-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴄʟꜰ=3ᴀᴜɢII
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
3ᴀᴜɢ-look-again-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIS
mq, a' nc.nzlu kc mrbr=pe=Ø tr-tu=pe=Ø-u mr-kc
behind but tree.coconut ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ lose=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS ɴᴇɢ-stand=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS-ɴᴇɢ ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘In their going, they looked back again, but the coconut tree [Cocos nucifera] was gone,
it was not standing there anymore.’ (41.12)

Transitivizer -ti and Pluractional -ti, slot 5
The transitivizer -ti of slot 5 has been present in many example sentences to this point. The
transitivizer increases the valency of an intransitive verb in order to license an object. Sentence
(54) has two forms of yrlz ‘marry’. The first tells the village Simon married into, and the verb has
no added valency morphology, while the second verb licenses the object, that is, who he married,
by use of -ti. The transitivizer is discussed in more detail in §7.4.
Yölëä Bënwë, yölëtiä këdü doa olvë dötüde Dora Yati.
yrlz=x Bznwz,
yrlz-ti=x kzdq
doa
olvz
marry=1ᴍɪɴI
Bznwz.vil,
marry-ᴛʀ=1ᴍɪɴI a
youth
female
drtq=de Dora
Yati
name=3ᴍɪɴII
Dora
Yati
‘I married into Bznwz village; I married a young woman named Dora Yati.’ (59.08)
There is a second morpheme -ti (§7.4.1) which fills the same verb complex slot, but with
a different function. This second -ti indicates pluractionality of objects with transitive verbs; a
multiplicity of objects are being acted on by the verb. In (55), -ti refers to the many things done.
…mâte da kä aletiköng...
mc=te
da
kx
ale-ti=kr=ngq
see=3ᴍɪɴII
thing
ѕᴜʙʀ
do-ᴘʟᴄᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢI=3ᴀᴜɢIP
‘…he saw the things we had done…’ (06.13)
Since the two -ti forms fill the same slot and never co-occur, it can be difficult in places
to identify which one is in use, without first investigating the verb root to determine whether it is
transitive or intransitive. The second function has only been recently identified, so all occurrences
of -ti in the SGM text were initially glossed as transitivizers. The text (forthcoming in four
volumes in TILP) has been edited to mark pluractional -ti as ᴘʟᴄᴛ where relevant, though some
instances may still have been overlooked.

Intensifier -tx and distributive -ne, slots +5 and +6
The intensifier -tx and distributive -ne have been previously presented in multiple example
sentences. Example (5), which has both and is repeated here with no numbering. The distributive,
illustrated in (64), means that the action of the verb is not isolated, but in no specific place and
even many random places. The -ne intensifier function is shown here; context determines the
function.
Mëdealwä mwitä käpipëne ä sâ tümelëpe-moupü.
Mzdealwx
mwi-tx=Ø kx-pipz-ne x
sc=
Mzdealwx
sleep-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS ѕᴜʙʀ-few-ɪɴᴛѕ and
ᴘꜰᴠ=

28

tq-melz=pe-mou-mq=Ø
ʀʟ-awaken=ᴄᴏѕ-again-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘Mzdealwx slept just a little while and he woke back up.’ (23.13)

Reflexive, reciprocal, and ‘together’ slot +8
The reflexive -lzbq and reciprocal -etr can fill slot +8. There is not a perfect correspondence
between English and Natqgu uses of the reflexive and reciprocal, and some speakers seem to use
-lzbq for both meanings. A straightforward use is found in (56), where two soldiers split up.
A' lö Japan kâng sâ tëaki-lëbüpe, këdü vëkimle pöla ä këdü vëkipemle më löpëki.
a' lr Japan kcng
sc=
tz-aki-lzbq=pe
but ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
Japan those
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-divide-ʀᴇꜰʟ=ᴄᴏѕ
kz-dq
vz-ki-mq=le
prla
ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
go-path-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
sea
x kz-dq

vz-ki=pe-mq=le
mz
lrpzki
and ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
go-path=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
road
‘But the Japanese split themselves up, one came along the sea and one came along the
road.’ (38.11)
An example of -etr ‘reciprocal’ is found in (57), in which the villagers of Nea and their
shipwrecked guests take leave of each other. Example (58) shows the suffix -lxblr ‘together.’ See
discussion at §4.3.3 regarding differences between -lxblr and -mi.
…yöni-etötäkö badö, ä sâ tëyapäpeng më lâsu tëvopeng.
yrni-etr-tx=kr badr x sc=
tz-ya-px=pe=ngq
cry-ʀᴇᴄᴘ-ɪɴᴛѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ and
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-paddle-Gᴅɪʀ.out=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS
mz
lcsu
tz-vo=pe=ngq
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ship
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-travel=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS
‘…we cried with them for each other, and then they paddled out to the ship and
left.’ (21.11)

The suffix -lxblr ‘together’ also fills +8 slot in the verb complex.
Yölütö-läblöbële nigö Mama Frank Bolen Toke më Sen Tomas mökâ Bënwë.
yrlq-tr-lxblr-bz=le ni=gr
mama
put-Gᴅɪʀ.in-together-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA be=1ᴀᴜɢII
priest
Frank
Bolen Toke
mz
Sen Tomas
mr-kc
Bznwz
Frank
Bolen Toke
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
St. Thomas
ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
Bznwz.vil.
‘Father Frank Bolen Toke joined us together at St. Thomas Church in Bznwz village.’
(64.04)

Enclitic aspect, slot +13
In addition to the proclitic aspect of slot -4, Natqgu has enclitic aspect in slot +13, which is filled
by four possible enclitics. The most frequent of these is =pe ‘change of state,’ which tracks the
discourse and establishes at what point in a process the action of the verb has reached. With telic
verbs, it reads as perfective, indicating a change of state from a previous negative state or the
situation in which COS is the state which results following the endpoint of the event. With atelic
verbs =pe indicates a completed event.
In combination with the imperfective it can express an ingressive meaning with stative
and atelic verbs or an incipient meaning ‘about to happen’ with punctual verbs. The same marker
can also express ‘already’-related meanings and ‘change of scene’ at the discourse level.
A second aspectual enclitic in slot +13 is =pnz ‘completive.’ It indicates that the action of
the verb has been done at some point in the past or prior to the action of another verb. Both =pe
and =pnz occur in example (59).

29

A' glötipeng muöde ayëpötilë-pnë-kaiä dëbödö.
a' glr-ti=pe-ngq
murde a-yzpr-ti-lz=pnz-kai=x

dzbr=dr
but be.dry-ᴛʀ=ᴄᴏѕ-ᴘʟ because ᴄᴀᴜѕ-cut.in.two-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.up=ᴄᴍᴘʟ-first=1ᴍɪɴI
root=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘But they were already dry because previously I had first cut them off at their roots.’
(69.42)
The final two enclitics in slot +13 are =be ‘yet’ illustrated in (94) and =ka ‘not yet’ with
three instances in (60). Note that =ka is the second part of a circumfix with tr- ‘negative’ being
its first member, as seen previously in the negative circumfix tr-…-u. But the second parts of
these two negative circumfixes occur in different slots, here in +13 and at in slot +21 for -u.
Mölämü lang etu tüpime bange tökölë-kakö nidö, töyâmne-kakö badö ä tövëne-kakö
badö.
mrlx=mq
la-ngq etu
tq-pi=mq=q ba=nge
son=2ᴍɪɴII
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴘʀᴏx-ᴘʟ
big
ʀʟ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=2ᴍɪɴI ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴍɪɴII
tr-krlz=ka=kr
ni=dr
tr-ycmne=ka=kr
badr
ɴᴇɢ-know=not.yet=1ᴀᴜɢI
be=3ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴇɢ-speak=not.yet=1ᴀᴜɢI
ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ
x tr-vzne=ka=kr badr
and ɴᴇɢ-walk=not.yet=1ᴀᴜɢI ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ
‘Those big sons of yours you told me about we don't know them yet, we haven't spoken
with them yet, and they have not traveled with us yet.’ (27.03)

Kz ‘also,’ slot +15
Examples of (-)kz ‘also’ have been shown in sentences (6), (41), and (46). It is also an
independent morpheme which can occur outside the verb complex to conjoin NPs and clauses.
The latter is described in §8.

Applicative -ngr, slot +16
The applicative -ngr occurs near the end of the verb complex, i.e. on its periphery. It licenses the
addition of an argument to the verb, often a reason or purpose, and is the only morpheme glossed
as APPL. Other morphemes with applicative functions are glossed with either their meaning or a
more specific function. The applicative is described more fully in §7.6 along with other valency-
changing devices. Examples are found in (31), (33), (41), and (49).

Restrictive =pwz ‘just, only’, slot +18
The restrictive clitic =pwz is the only morpheme filling slot +18. It was previously mentioned in
Table 5 of §3.4 about demonstratives, in relation to its role as part of a complex demonstrative.
Another example is found in sentence (23). In combination with the intensifier -tx, the form txpwz
can occur outside the verb word and modify predicates and NPs. It follows the elements it
modifies.

Subject and object enclitics, slots +19 and +20
Regarding the pronominal enclitics of Table 4, column 1 fills the subject slot on the verb
complex, and column 2 fills the object slot. The latter is illustrated by example (103), repeated
here in part.
Twëkipälele më nâtü Nemya'
twz-ki-px=le=le

mz
nctq
Nemya'

take-path-Gᴅɪʀ.out=3ᴍɪɴIA=3ᴍɪɴP
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
point.of.land
Nemya'

‘It took it out along the point of Nemya'…’ (19.07)

30

5. Verb classes
Following Alfarano (2021:361-362) for Nalögo, the verbs of Natqgu can also be divided into four
classes, yielding seven total types. These include three intransitive types §5.1, two transitive types
§5.2, an inherent semitransitive §5.3, and an ambitransitive §5.4. Verb classes are defined based
on:
(i) the valency-changing morphology a verb combines with, (ii) the semantic distinction between
stative and dynamic verbs, and (iii) the semantic role of the intransitive subject (Evans 2003:22).
5.1 Intransitive verbs
Intransitive verbs are those which form a complete sentence or independent clause with only a
verb and a subject. The three intransitive classes in Natqgu are: Class I, those with no transitive
form; Class II, those transitivized by the causative prefix a-; and Class III those transitivized with
the transitivizer -ti.

Class I intransitives with no transitive form
Alfarano (2021) identifies two Nalögo verbs in this category, ‘die’ and ‘be.stinky’ and Natqgu,
brtu ‘be.stinky’ also belongs to this category. It does not occur in the SGM text and only a few
times in the translated scriptures, as in (61), but never with causative or transitive morphemes.
However, I posit that there are likely further Class I intransitives yet to be identified. One
candidate is pwxkqtu ‘be.ugly,’ which occurs in the lexical database, but for which I have no
example sentences.
Öpibë Mata bade kä, “Käetu, yöbütipäpemle möla ëbü pwäpe ä bötupe.
r-pi-bz
Mata

ba=de
kx

kx-etu

ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon Martha
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ

ѕᴜʙʀ-bigman

yrbq-ti-px=pe-mq=le

mrla
zbq
pwx=pe
x
lay-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.out=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
there
day
four=ᴄᴏѕ
and
brtu=pe=Ø
be.stinky=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘Martha said to him, “Master, he has already been lying there four days and he already
stinks.”’ (John 11:39)

Class II intransitives—may have a causative
Class II intransitives are those which can be causativized by the addition of the causative prefix
a-. These include many of the attributive verbs involving color and size, along with numerous
others, as shown in (62) with nominalized forms of ‘white’ and ‘black.’
Bëkü yölüü nëesalë-köm më naöm, muöde öbläbë bam nëapökingö ä nëabongö
nünginaöm…
bzkq
yrlq=q nz-esalz-kr=mq

mz
nar=mq
murde
ᴘʀᴏʜ
put=2ᴍɪɴI ɴᴍʟᴢ1-promise-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=2ᴍɪɴII ᴘʀᴇᴘ head=2ᴍɪɴII
because
rblx-bz

bam

nz-a-prki-ngr

x

be.difficult-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
ᴅᴀᴛ=2ᴍɪɴII
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-white-ɴᴍʟᴢ
and

nz-a-bo-ngr

nqnginar=mq
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-dark.coloured-ɴᴍʟᴢ
hair=2ᴍɪɴII
‘Don't make promises by your head, because it is impossible for you to whiten or blacken
your hairs...’ (Matthew 5:36)

Class III intransitives—may co-occur with a causative, a transitivizer, or both
The third class of intransitives is comprised of those which may combine with a causative, a
transitivizer, or both. Example (63) illustrates an intransitive transitivized with -ti. The verb mwa
means to hunt or fish. The addition of -ti TRNS licenses what is caught, indicating that the hunting

31

or fishing was successful. In (63) the object caught, here the small needlefish, is fronted and not
reiterated following the verb, which would be its normal position.
…këdü nâboi kätopwëne sâ mwatipe lika nede.
kzdq ncboi kx-topwz-ne=Ø
sc= mwa-ti=pe
lika
ne=de.
a needlefish ѕᴜʙʀ-little-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴘꜰᴠ= fish-ᴛʀ=ᴄᴏѕ
kite
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl=3ᴍɪɴII.
‘…a tiny needle fish, his kite caught [it].’ (11.06)
The next three sentences use the intransitive verb ngc ‘burn’ to illustrate the remaining variations:
a bare intransitive in (64), the addition of a causative in (65), and with both a causative and a
transitivizer in (66).
Lâsukälvâ lâdeng tüngâneom ölwäkö, nëesë'mëng.
lcsu-kx-lvc
lc=de-ng

tq-ngc-ne-o-mq
rlwx=kr
ship-ѕᴜʙʀ-fly
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII-ᴘʟ
ʀʟ-burn-ᴅѕᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.down-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
count=1ᴀᴜɢI
nz-esz'mz=ng
3ᴀᴜɢ-six=3ᴀᴜɢIS
‘We counted the planes burning down everywhere, there were six.’ (51.15)
In (64) the planes are burning on their own with no causation indicated. In (65) the causative
indicates who caused the burning. The hearts of the doves are removed in the first clause, but not
repeated in the second, though they’re understood. They do not require the addition of -ti TRNS.
But in (66), the causative indicates someone caused the burning and -ti TRNS licenses the things
burned.
Nëkapämlö dabukö bona kâng li sâ tëangâpebëlö më Nâbö.
nz-kapx-mq=lr
dabu
ngr bona kc-ng

li
sc=
3ᴀᴜɢ-remove-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIA
heart
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
pigeon ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
two
ᴘꜰᴠ=
tz-a-ngc=pe-bz=lr
mz
ncbr
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-burn=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIA ᴘʀᴇᴘ
cross
‘They removed the hearts of the two pigeons and burned them for the Cross.’ (07.02)

Më nibö nëmu-kögö, nëtelvëlö më Menabë kâ nyö nëangâti-ngödö nâvö ngö bona, nâ,
muli dakänëng kä yâtäo ä leu ödöng amölä.
mz nibr
nz-mu-kr=gr
nz-telvz=lr
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
back.part
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-eat-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII
3ᴀᴜɢ-ignite=3ᴀᴜɢIA
mz Menabz
kc
nyr
nz-a-ngc-ti-ngr=dr
ncvr
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
Menabz
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
fire
3ᴀᴜɢ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-burn-ᴛʀ-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴀᴜɢII
meat
ngr bona nc
muli
dakxnzng
kx
yctxo
x
leu
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ pigeon fish
piece
food
ѕᴜʙʀ
left.over
and
leaf
r=dr-ngq
amrlx
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ=3ᴀᴜɢII-ᴘʟ
all
‘After our eating, they [my father] with Menabz lit a fire for them to burn the flesh of
the pigeon, fish, and any pieces of leftover food, and all their leaves.’ (07.16)
5.2 Transitive verbs
For closely related Nalögo, Alfarano (2021:374ff) identifies a class of transitive verb forms
which are inherently transitive. This class has two subclasses: Class I, transitive verbs with no
intransitive or semitransitive derivation and Class II transitive verbs which allow semitransitive
derivation. The same two classes occur in Natqgu, though the first class has few members.

32

Class I Transitives—no transitivity modification permitted
Class I transitives are those which cannot be made intransitive or semitransitive by the middle
particle -r. One verb identified as belonging to this category is ale ‘do’,14 illustrated in example
(67). There are presumed to be other verbs in this category which have yet to be identified.
Ëbë sâ tüalepeä kâ da kä tömölëu kä napöpä-ngöne.
zbz
sc=
tq-ale=pe=x kc
da
kx
tr-mrlz-u

so.then
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-do=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴍɪɴI ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
thing
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɴᴇɢ-be.good-ɴᴇɢ
kx
na-prpx-ngr=ne
ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-leave-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=1ᴍɪɴII
‘Then I did something which was not good so I might leave because of it.’ (70.15)

Transitive class II—take middle prefix -r forming semitransitives
Alfarano & Boerger (2022) discuss semitransitives and the middle prefix ö- in Nalögo and
Natügu. Class II transitive verbs take the middle prefix -r, which decreases transitivity, leading to
semitransitive and depatientive constructions. Semitransitive constructions express a focus on the
action. They are syntactically transitive, but morphologically intransitive. That is, an object is
present, but the person marking of third persons—the only place there is a distinction—is
intransitive. The objects of semitransitives are more generic than those of transitive clauses.
Depatientive constructions are similar to semitransitives, in that they also focus on the action, but
they are both morphologically and syntactically intransitive. That is, the person and number
marking is intransitive and the object is syntactically omitted, though semantically implied.
Examples (68)-(70) show the verb nibq ‘kill’ in transitive, semitransitive and depatientive
constructions, respectively. In (68) the third person transitive enclitic =le is the subject of nibq
and the object is nim ‘you’. But in (69) and (70) the presence of the middle prefix r- changes the
subject enclitic to the intransitive form. The semitransitive of (69) has a generic object ‘people’
while in the depatientive of (70) the object is implicit and not part of the syntax. It is part of a list
of negative commands, this one being ‘Thou shalt not kill.’
Öpi-moupüle kä, “Tönanibüleu nim nadü kâ, a' nabë-ngön katris.”
r-pi-mou-mq=le
kx
tr-na-nibq=le-u nim
ᴍɪᴅ-say-again-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɴᴇɢ-ɪʀʀ-kill=3ᴍɪɴIA-ɴᴇɢ
be=2ᴍɪɴII
nadq
kc,
a'
na-bz-ngr=nq
katris
black.ant
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ,
but
ɪʀʀ-die-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=2ᴍɪɴI
cartridge
‘He said further, “It won’t kill you, that black ant, but you can die from cartridges.”’
(47.38)

A' nâblo önibüpe leplë kä nëmâtäpwë.
a' ncblo
r-nibq=pe=Ø
leplz kx
nz-mc-tx-pwz
but
man ᴍɪᴅ-kill=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
people ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴘᴀѕ-see-ɪɴᴛѕ-just
‘But a man only kills people that are seen.’ (13.16)

…Öpibë Jisës kä, “Kölâde seleng: ‘Bëkü kä naönibü.’…”
r-pi-bz
Jiszs
kx
kr-lc=de

sele-ngq

ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
Jesus
ѕᴜʙʀ
ʀᴘʀɴ2-ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
here-ᴘʟ

bzkq kx
na-r-nibq=Ø
ᴘʀᴏʜ ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-ᴍɪᴅ-kill
‘…Jesus said, “These here: ‘No one should kill.’…”’ (Matthew 19:18)

14 The verb ale ‘do’ can occur with –ti, in phrases like da kcng tqaletile ‘the things he did.’ But this is the
pluractional –ti, not the transitivizer –ti.

33

5.3 Inherently semi-transitive verbs—
Again like Nalögo, Natqgu has a class of inherently semitransitive verbs, which in their basic,
unmodified form occur in semitransitive and depatientive constructions. These semitransitive
verbs require the transitivizer -ti for the object to become specific rather than generic.
A prototypical Natqgu semitransitive is the verb pe ‘plant,’ as shown in the discourse by
Jesus in John 4:35-38. Examples (71) to (73) are not the full Bible verses, but only the parts
which illustrate the semitransitive. Example (71) illustrates that the verb pe can take an object,
making it syntactically transitive. The object ‘seed’ is implicit in the rest of the passage. Example
(72) illustrates the depatientive, in that the object has been deleted and the subject is intransitive.
Example (73) has two forms of pe ‘plant’. The first of these is the nominalized form ‘planting’. It
does not require the middle prefix -r to make it generic, since the verb is already semitransitive.
The second form shows pe with the transitivizer -ti (§7.4), indicating specific seeds were planted,
that is, those by which people were told the news about God.
Mëbü ka peä ötü më nabë leplë kâng tëälölö natünge...
mzbq ka

pe=x

rtq
mz
nabz
leplz
kc-ngq
day
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴘʀᴏx
plant=1ᴍɪɴI
seed
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
heart
people ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ

tz-xlr=lr

natq=nge
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-hear=3ᴀᴜɢIA
word=1ᴍɪɴII
‘Today I planted seeds in the hearts of people who heard my words…’ (John 4:35)
…mölä kâ tüpe ä mölä kâ tüökülë nëabötëlvëlö doa kä ömâtile nëlungö käboi.
mrlx
kc

tq-pe=Ø
x
mrlx
kc
tq-r-kq-lz=Ø
guy
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-plant=3ᴍɪɴIS and
guy
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-pick-Gᴅɪʀ.up=3ᴍɪɴIS
nz-abrtz-lvz=lr

doa
kx
r-mc-ti=le

nzlungr kxboi
3ᴀᴜɢ-be.happy-about=3ᴀᴜɢIA
person ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴍɪᴅ-see-ᴛʀ=3ᴍɪɴIA
eternal life
‘The one who plants and the one who harvests are happy about the person who finds
eternal life.’ (John 4:36)
Tökäputöwamuu elö më nëpengö. A' nëpeti doa këbleng, më nëöpipä-köbëlö më leplë
nöpa ngö Gât.
Tr-kxpu-tr=amu-u

elr
mz
nz-pe-ngr

ɴᴇɢ-toil-Gᴅɪʀ.in=2ᴀᴜɢI-ɴᴇɢ
therein ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-plant-ɴᴍʟᴢ

a'
nz-pe-ti

doa
kzble-ngq
mz

but
3ᴀᴜɢ-plant-ᴛʀ

person different-ᴘʟ
ᴘʀᴇᴘ

nz-r-pipx-kr-bz=lr

mz
leplz
nrpa
ngr
Gct

ɴᴍʟᴢ1- ᴍɪᴅ-declare-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIA
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
people news
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
God

‘You do not toil therein by planting. But other people planted by their declaring to
people the news about God.’ (John 4:38)
5.4 Ambitransitive verbs
Alfarano (2021:375-77) classifies five Nalögo verbs as ambitransitive. Since the third person is
the only place RSC languages distinguish between transitive and intransitive person marking,
ambitransitive verbs can occur with either transitive or intransitive subjects in the third person
without the addition of valency-changing morphology to make them more transitive or less so.
One of these five has a cognate ambitransitive in Natqgu, the verb lvx ‘open.’ It is the
only one identified to date, but presumably there are more yet to be identified. Sentence (74)
shows the verb in an intransitive clause and (75) in a transitive clause.
…naonöä nyë Gât sa nalväpäbë bade.
naonrx
nyz
Gct sa=
na-lvx-px-bz=Ø

ba=de
doorway
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ God ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-open-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴍɪɴI
‘…the door of God will be opened to him.’ (Matthew 7:8)

34

Nâblo kâ tüaâlve naonöä, lväpäbële naonöä më käaâlve sip.
ncblo
kc

tq-aclve=Ø
naonrx
lvx-px-bz=le

man
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-oversee=3ᴍɪɴIS doorway
open-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA

naonrx
mz
kx-aclve=Ø

sip
doorway
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ѕᴜʙʀ -oversee=3ᴍɪɴIS sheep

‘The man who oversees the door, he opens the door to the shepherd.’ (John 10:3)
5.5 Verbs with no specific class
A number of verbs are difficult to classify because they can combine with several applicative
forms which seem to change the meaning in similar ways, making their functions and differences
difficult to determine. These deserve future attention to discover if patterns can be identified, but
are outside the scope of this sketch.
6. Simple clause structures
A clause is the smallest syntactic unit that can express a proposition and consists of a predicate
plus obligatory ‘core’ arguments and optional ‘peripheral’ arguments. Dixon (2010b) takes core
arguments to be of any of the types ‘S’, intransitive subject; ‘A’, transitive subject; ‘O’, transitive
object. While the predicate is often a verb, it can also be filled by other word classes. A simple
clause (or main clause), is one which constitutes a sentence15 on its own. The sections below
reflect the simple clause types of Natqgu.
6.1 Verbless Clauses
While there is a copula ngini~ngi ‘be, become’ in Natqgu (Table 4), it is not in frequent use in
simple clauses. Instead, Natqgu creates verbless clauses in which non-verbal lexemes serve as
predicates (or complements16). In these, the subject is juxtaposed to the second component.
Relationships encoded in Natqgu verbless clauses are: identity, possession, and existence. See
examples in (76) and (77).
a. Alex mölänge.

b. Böpi nange.

Alex mrlx=nge

brpi na=nge
Alex son=1ᴍɪɴII

banana ᴘᴄʟꜰ.food=1ᴍɪɴII
‘Alex is my son.’

‘The banana is mine.’
identity (equative)

possession
Këdü kâ nâblo dötüde Mewäbu.

kz-dq

kc

ncblo
drtq=de
me-wxbu
ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
man
name=3ᴍɪɴII
male-sit
‘There is a man named Mewxbu.’
existence

To encode location, Natqgu does not use a verbless clause, but like Engdewu (Vaa 2013:
377) employs one of two place-holder verbs meaning ‘stay’ which occur as the predicates of
these clauses. These were illustrated by examples (13a) for animate subjects and (13b) for
inanimate subjects in §3.2.3.

15 A sentence consists of a main clause plus optionally a number of subordinate clauses (Dixon 2010b: 75). It is
often a prosodic unit, and is for written languages traditionally seen as “what comes between two full stops (or
periods)” (Dixon 2010b: 93).
16 Dixon (2010a) analyses a verbless clause to consist of two core arguments, the Verbless Clause Subject and
the Verbless Clause Complement, while there is no predicate in the clause.

35

Possessive clauses
In addition to verbless possessive clauses like (76b), Natqgu also has a bound verb rngi17 ‘have’
which combines with the dative pronoun base ba as in example (78) and with possessive
classifiers as in example (79); (see Table 8, §3.6.2). The Natqgu corpus includes such
combinations with the first seven of the nine possessive classifiers. Note also the complex noun
example in Table 8 with PCLF.hand.
Jon vë-nüblünepwële nümü sâ nâblo kä tö-öngibau.
Jon
vz-nqblq-ne-pwz=le

nqmq sc=
ncblo
kx
tr-rngi-ba-u
John
go-follow-ɪɴᴛѕ-just=3ᴍɪɴIA
way
ᴘꜰᴠ
man
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɴᴇɢ-have-ᴅᴀᴛ-ɴᴇɢ
‘John only followed the way of the man who does not have (things).’ (Mark 1:6)
Këdü doa olvë kämnâ-kamelö naöngine doa nâblo, …
Kz-dq doa olvz
kxmnckamelr
na-rngi-ne

doa
ncblo

ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ child female virgin

ɪʀʀ-have-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl
child
man
‘A young virgin girl will have a male child…’ (Matthew 1:23)
6.2 Verbal Clauses: Core Arguments
Natqgu has a transitivity-based system with three main simple declarative clause types:
intransitive, transitive and semitransitive, as illustrated in the following sections.

Basic Intransitive Clauses
The basic constituent order of an intransitive clause is SV when S is a noun or noun phrase. Other
orders are ungrammatical, except that it is VS when S is a pronominal enclitic. See sentence (5)
which contains two intransitive clauses joined by the conjunction ‘and.’ Attribution in Natqgu is
expressed through intransitive clauses which have a stative verb as the predicate, as illustrated
previously by the last clause in (61), brtupe ‘he already stinks.’
Natqgu has two strategies for talking about weather, one involving a verbless clause and
the other an intransitive clause, as illustrated with ‘rain’ in (80). In (80a) tewa ‘rain’ is a noun
filling the S slot of the intransitive verbal predicate. In (80b) tewa ‘rain’ is the predicate, creating
an avalent construction.
a. Tewa dâpe.

b. Tewape.
tewa
dc=pe=Ø

tewa=pe=Ø
rain
fall=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
rain=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘It’s raining.’

‘It’s raining.’

Basic Transitive Clauses
A transitive clause has a transitive predicate with two core arguments, A and O. Transitive verbs
were discussed in §5.2.2. Unmarked word order is VAO as in (81), but either A or O can be
fronted for discourse purposes, as in (82), where ninge ‘me’ is fronted. But note, too, that there
are grammatical options which are not common, but which do occur, as in (68) where the verb
was marked with 3MIN1A =le, followed by nim ‘you’ as the object. Then immediately following
nim, the subject of the sentence is rearticulated, ‘that black ant.’ More normally, ‘that black ant’
would be fronted.
Aelwapä Gât da kämule lâng…
aelwa-px Gct
da
kx-mu=le
lc-ng
show-Gᴅɪʀ.out God
thing
ѕᴜʙʀ-be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
‘God demonstrated such things…’
(30.31)

17 I frequently debate with myself whether rngi could be r- MID plus ngi ‘be’. Then in combination with the
possessive classifiers it would mean ‘be belonging to.’ This would avoid positing a bound verb ‘have.’ Alfarano
(2021:411-412) analyzes the Nalögo cognate as ‘a hybrid form, displaying both nominal and verbal properties.’

36

Ninge, mulëpekö badö pripekt më tebol nyëdö.
ninge, mu-lz=pe=kr badr pripekt
mz
tebol
nyz=dr
be=1ᴍɪɴII, eat-Gᴅɪʀ.up=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ prefect
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
tebol
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘As for me, I ate with the prefect up at their table.’ (29.29)

Semitransitive Clauses
Semitransitive clauses are are those in which a transtive verb is detransitivized to participate in
the semitransitive clause by the middle prefix ö-. This leads to intranstive morphological marking
of the subject and the patient being generic or irrelevant, so that the focus is on the action. This
contrasts with transitive objects which are specific. See examples (68) to (70) and §7.2.

Imperative Clauses
Imperative clauses express commands. The verb is stripped of its TAM distinctions. They have a
second person as their subject, the marking of which in Natqgu is omitted in the minimal (83a)
and present in the augmented (83b). Sometimes the final [u] in (83b) is deleted in the imperative.
a. Vëm!

b. Mnâ-löpi-amu!
vz-mq=___

mnc-lrpi=amu
go- Pᴅɪʀ.hither=___
stay-quiet=2ᴀᴜɢI
‘Come!’

‘Be quiet!’
(11.16)
To form a negative imperative the prohibitive bzkq ‘Don’t!’ is used. It can occur on its own as a
single word command or it can precede what is forbidden. But unlike the positive imperative, the
2MIN form is maintained, rather than stripped off, as in (84).
a. Bëkü maletöü!

b. Bëküpe dwatöamu më rum lâ.
bzkq maletr=q

bzkq=pe dwa-tr=amu mz rum
lc
do not hold (in hand)=2ᴍɪɴI
do not=ᴄᴏѕ jump-Gᴅɪʀ.in=2ᴀᴜɢI ᴘʀᴇᴘ room
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘Don’t hold it!’ (42.12)
‘Don’t enter that room!’ (08.05)

Hortatives
Clauses with irrealis marking and the non-second person forms can display a hortative function,
yielding meanings like ‘Let X do Y,’ or ‘X should~must do Y,’ as in (85). Irrealis can also be used
with second person forms to give more polite commands, ‘You should do Y,’ as in (86), where the
force of the imperative depends on the socio-personal relationships. In (86), an American military
officer is leading a group of students on a spying mission. The syntax of the sentence—‘one of
you go’ vs. ‘one of you must go’ makes the polite form more probable, especially since he had no
real authority over the student volunteers in their late teens and early twenties.
Nëyâmnetöng elö ä dötwödö esë'ti kä naölasëpelö mëtea nyëdö.
nz-ycmne-tr=ng elr
x
drtwr=dr
esz'-ti kx
3ᴀᴜɢ-speak-Gᴅɪʀ.in=3ᴀᴜɢIS
thereon and
mind=3ᴀᴜɢII
one-ᴛʀ ѕᴜʙʀ
na-rlasz=pe=lr mztea nyz=dr
ɪʀʀ-leave=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA
village ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘They talked about it and they were in agreement that they should leave their village.’
(09.05)

Këdü nimu navë muöde ma tülawititäne nimu amölä!
kz-dq
ni-mu na-vz=Ø murde ma= tq-lawi-ti-tx-ne=Ø
ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ be=2ᴀᴜɢII ɪʀʀ-go=3ᴍɪɴIS because lest
ʀʟ-chop-ᴘʟᴄᴛ-ɪɴᴛѕ-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS

ni=mu
amrlx
be=2ᴀᴜɢII
all!
‘One of you has to go lest you all be chopped to bits!’ (47.18)

37

Interrogative Clauses
Questions can be asked in Natqgu in multiple ways: polar questions, content questions, and an ‘or
not’ tag question.
6.2.6.1
Polar questions
Example (87) shows that polar questions in Natqgu are identical to declarative clauses
morphologically. They are distinguished by their respective intonation contours,18 with
declaratives having a falling contour and polar questions a rising contour. Polar questions
anticipate answers of either eu ‘yes’ or trtingr ‘no.’
a. Kölëü.

b. Kölëü?
Krlz=q

krlz=q
know=2ᴍɪɴI

know=2ᴍɪɴI
‘You know.’

‘Do you know?’
6.2.6.2
Content questions
Content questions anticipate answers addressing the information specified in the question word.
They mark the clause as a question and minimally contain the question word and a predicate.
Question words are clause initial in Natqgu. They also have rising intonation contours and often
nike ‘what’ and ‘neke’ ‘who’ function as pronouns and are core arguments. In their simplest
forms, the Natqgu question words are: neke ‘who’ (88), nike ‘what’, ‘drlve~myx’ ‘where’, mzli kx
‘when’ (14a), memule ‘why’ (89), myx kxmu ‘how’, and tqlvr ‘how many~much’ (51).
… Neke öyëkö tabao mölâ?
neke r-yzkr=Ø
tabao mr-lc
who ᴍɪᴅ-peel =3ᴍɪɴIS papaya place-ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘Who peeled papaya there?’ (06.05)

…Memule tölängiti-ngömamuu natünge?
memule
tr-lxngiti-ngr-mq=amu-u
natq=nge
why
ɴᴇɢ-obey-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=2ᴀᴜɢI-ɴᴇɢ
word=1ᴍɪɴII
‘…Why don't you obey my word(s)?’ (47.16)
6.2.6.3
Tag questions
Alfarano (2021) reports on a sentence final tag particle nge in Nalögo, which does not exist in
Natqgu. However, Natqgu does ask an ‘or not’ question, as in (90).
Pibë ena më Mëdealwä, nëmu suti dötwöde nëabë-köbëkö këdü da kä yâm bagö e
tötingö?
pi-bz
ena
mz
Mzdealwx
nzmu suti
drtwr=de

say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
just
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
Mzdealwx
if want
mind=3ᴍɪɴII

nz-abz-kr-bz=kr

kz-dq

da
kx

ɴᴍʟᴢ1-try-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI
ᴀᴛ- ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ thing
ѕᴜʙʀ

yc-mq=Ø ba=gr
e
trtingr
stay-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢII
or
no
‘Just ask Mzdealwx if he wants us to try something we have or not?’ (23.07)
6.3 Negative Clauses
In Natqgu, standard negation (Payne 1985) is expressed by a circumfix negator involving the two
negators tr= and =u, which define the bounds of the verb complex (§4). Among SC languages,
Engdewu (Vaa 2013:315) and Nalögo (Alfarano 2021:527) have similar standard negation. Such

18 See Vaa (2013) and Alfarano (2022) who include intonation contours in their respective grammars of other
Santa Cruz languages, which can be taken as representative also of Natqgu.

38

negation applies to all basic and derived verb classes, as illustrated by examples (9) and (67) for
stative verbs; (3), (53), and (73) for intransitive verbs; as well as (44) and (68) for transitives.
The precore negator tr= also forms a circumfix with the bound aspect marker =ka ‘yet’ of
slot +13. When =ka is present, the occurrence of the postverbal negator =u is ungrammatical.
This is illustrated by three instances in sentence (60). A separate morpheme =be ‘still, yet’ is the
positive form of =ka and occurs in the same position in the verb complex.
6.4 Verbal Clauses: Peripheral Arguments
In general, exclamations, interjections, and greetings, which are not otherwise discussed in this
sketch, occur first in an utterance, while oblique arguments and adjuncts follow the predicate they
modify.

Prepositional Phrases
The only Natqgu preposition, mz, is likely from POc *ma, reconstructed both as a conjunction
and a prepositional verb (Moyse-Faurie and Lynch 2004: 449). It encodes a wide range of
peripheral roles and is cognate with Nalögo mö (Alfarano 2021: 397). The preposition mz does
not take pronominal enclitic objects. Syntactically PPs introduced by mz normally occur after the
predicate. However, they can start a sentence when referencing the previous sentence in a
discourse. Examples of mz were previously illustrated by sentences (2), (3), (4), (34), (53), and
(73) where the NP following the preposition can be headed by any of the free noun types
described in 3.2.

Nominal adjuncts
Like PPs, local nouns referring to a location and temporal nouns expressing time can both serve
as adjuncts in the clause. An example of a local noun is shown in (91), where in conjunction with
-tr ‘GDIR.in’ for ‘inside’, brma ‘house’ expresses a location and functions as an adjunct.
Sâ tüöpipebo më Lölvë nadwatöpëkö böma…
sc= tq-r-pi=pe-bz=x mz Lrlvz na-dwa-tr-bz=kr brma

ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI ᴘʀᴇᴘ Lrlvz ɪʀʀ-jump-Gᴅɪʀ.in-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI house

‘I said to Lrlvz we should go inside the building…’ (03.12)
Similarly, in (92), the temporal NP formed by the head noun mzli plus its modifier kx esz' ‘one’
also functions as an adjunct.
Suti dötwögö buk lâng pwä nëyököpä-köbëlö mëli käesë'.
suti drtwr=gr
buk
lc-ng
pwx

want neck=1ᴀᴜɢII
book
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
four

nz-yrkrpx-kr-bz=lr

mzli
kx-esz'
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-complete-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIA
time
ѕᴜʙʀ-one
‘We wanted those four books to be finished at the same time.’ (80.09)

Adverbial positions outside the verb complex
In §4.3.3. I described the five slots in the verb complex filled by adverbs: manner adverbs in slot
+3, degree adverbs in slot +9, qualifier adverbs in slot +11, quantifier adverbs in slot +12, and
temporal adverbs in slot +14. As already noted for the temporal adverbs, some of these other
types can also modify the entire sentence and occur as adjuncts outside the verb complex, such as
mou ‘further, again, more’ and zvz ‘always’. As such they occur at the beginning of a sentence as
in (93), before or after the verb word.
X mou, nëaelwa-kë-ngöbë dalö töau sâgu.
x
mou
nz-aelwakz-ngr-bz da-lr
trau sc=gu
and
further ᴘᴀѕ-show-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
things-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.assoc money ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=12ᴀᴜɢII
‘And furthermore, also shown were things regarding our [red feather] money.’ (62.15)

39

7. Valency-changing morphemes
As Hill found in her discussion of Longgu (2011:458-459), I find also for Natqgu, that
homophonous forms have multiple functions, which need to be pulled apart, and that these
functions occur and intersect on both the syntactic and semantic planes. With this in mind, in this
section, I discuss the valency-changing morphemes of Natqgu, which add or remove an argument
to the verb they attach to. Some added arguments become core arguments and some are
peripheral. These forms were referred to previously in §4, with Tables 9, 10, and 11 illustrating
slots of the verb complex. With regard to the core applicatives in §7.3 and the transitivizer in
§7.4, I also discuss homophonous and related forms which do not change valency.
7.1 Causative, a-
The Natqgu causative prefix a- occurs in slot -1 of the verb complex. It is a reflex of the POc
causative *pa-. Use of the causative prefix adds a core argument to the verb, the causer. The
causative prefix occurs with Natqgu intransitive verbs, such as:
•
pq ‘be.hot’ and a-pq ‘make s.t. hotʼ (stative),
•
su ‘cook and a-su ‘cook s.tʼ (process),
•
wz ‘work’ and a-wz ‘cause to work’ (activity).
The single ambitransitive identified to date for Natqgu in §5.4, lvx ‘open’ also occurs with a
causative, as illustrated in (94).
Növö ngödö sa natwëbetäne më dötâ' më nëapu-ködö lödë kâng tüalvälë nöâ.
nrvr
ngr=dr
sa=na-twz=be-tx-ne=Ø

mz
drtc'
mz
bone
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ=3ᴀᴜɢII
ɪᴘꜰᴠ=ɪʀʀ=take=still-ɪɴᴛѕ-ᴅѕᴛʀ=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ground ᴘʀᴇᴘ
nz-apu-kr=dr

lrdz
kcng
tq-a-lvx-lz

nrc

ɴᴍʟᴢ1-be.like-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴀᴜɢII
coral
those
ʀʟ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-open-Gᴅɪʀ.up
wave

‘Their bones will still be all over the ground like the coral the waves cause to be brought
up into the open.’ (Psalm 141:7)
Causatives are found in examples (16), (21), (40), (49), (62), and (65) and can co-occur with -ti
‘transitivizer’ as illustrated by (59) and (66).
7.2 Middle, r-
The Natqgu middle morpheme r- also occurs in slot -1; it cannot co-occur with the causative. It is
a reflex of the POc *paRi- (Alfarano & Boerger 2022: 31ff), reconstructed as encoding several
meanings, including collective, associative, iterative, dispersive, and reciprocal (Pawley
1973:150-153). It is the primary valency-reducing device in Natqgu. It changes a transitive to a
semitransitive, with intransitive person marking and a generic object, or it changes it to a
depatientive with intransitive person marking and the object not present syntactically. Examples
with the middle morpheme are: (1), (18), (40), (48), (50), (69), (70), and (72), with sentence (48)
illustrating its co-occurrence with -mi ‘depictive’ (Næss et al, To appear).19
Speaking of the cognate morpheme (v)e- in Äiwoo, Næss (To appear) analyzes it as a
pluractional, saying that pluractionals are seen as encompassing the repetition of an action, or an
action being performed by multiple agents and/or on multiple objects. Another function of r- in
both Natqgu and Nalögo is to indicate event-internal plurality, as described about sentence (95).
…the action of shooting is internally-plural, in that, it does not involve only one shot
or burst by the machineguns, rather, the prefix (v)ö- signals that the subevents of
shooting for each machinegun are repetitive. (Alfarano & Boerger 2022: 52)

19 Sentences (40) and (72) with –ti ‘transitivizer’ have the form, which could be divided: r-mc-ti ᴍɪᴅ-see-ᴛʀ/ᴘʟᴄᴛ
which means ‘find something’. I expect it is a fossilized form rather than having both detransitivizing and
transitivizing morphemes on the same verb. The meaning changes from ‘see’ to ‘find’ and no other verbs
combine the two morphemes.

40

Mëli kâpwë älöbëkö masingan käkülu öpnë'pe më nabë nâ nëlu kâ.
mzli kc-pwz
xlr-bz=kr masingan
kx-kqlu

time ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-just hear-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI
machinegun
ѕᴜʙʀ-many

r-pnz'=pe=Ø
mz
nabz
nc
nzlu kc
ᴍɪᴅ-shoot=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ
area
tree
coconut ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘At the same time we heard many machine guns shooting into the area of the coconut
trees.’ (47.31)
This event internal plurality contrasts with the pluractional -ti, which indicates plurality of
objects, discussed in §7.4.1.
7.3 Core applicatives
The set of core applicatives (Cᴀᴘᴘʟ) occurring in slot +2, immediately following the stem
(comprised of the main verb root of slot 0 and any optional compounding morphology from slot
+1) are described below. Recall from §4.2 that the compounding slot and the Cᴀᴘᴘʟ slot were
proposed as distinct slots because the Cᴀᴘᴘʟs can occur following a complex stem. Each Cᴀᴘᴘʟ
licenses a further nominal argument, with the role determined by the meaning of the applicative.
Each of these is glossed with its unique meaning rather than a grammatical category, thereby
reserving the label ‘applicative’ for the multi-functional peripheral applicative -ngr described in
§7.6. The motivation for this comes from its being both more general and more frequent. Several
Cᴀᴘᴘʟs have related non-applicative forms or uses which are also briefly discussed here.

-lvz ‘about’
The Natqgu form -lvz ‘about’ allows the addition of a stimulus or content argument to an
intransitive verb making it bivalent. It is cognate with the Nalögo applicative ulë (Alfarano 2021:
457-459), but while similar, their constraints and usages diverge.
For Natqgu, compare the three sentences in (96), (97), and (98). Example (96) illustrates
that ‘be.happy’ is an intransitive verb, since the 3AUG person takes the intransitive marking =ng.
The content of their happiness is in a prepositional phrase following the verb.
Leplë na-abötëng më nëokatö-köm nidö.
leplz
na-abrtz=ng

mz
nz-okatr-kr=mq

nidr
people ɪʀʀ-be.happy=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-help-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=2ᴍɪɴII
be=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘People will be happy in your helping them.’ (Psalm 69:32)
But (97), on the other hand, shows the 3AUG person with the transitive pronominal
enclitic =lr, indicating that -lvz has increased the valency of abrtz ‘be.happy’ to mean ‘be happy
about s.t.’, in this case the nominalized object ‘our living with them,’ which does not require a
preposition. Then in (98), the goal or stimulus licensed by -lvz is left implicit, being present in the
previous context, but not reiterated following the verb. In spite of this, the pronominal marking
on the verb is transitive due to the presence of -lvz.
Käbügöng nëabötëlvëlö nëmnâ-kögö badö.
kxbq=gr-ngq nz-abrtz-lvz=lr
nz-mnc-kr=gr
badr
cousin=1ᴀᴜɢII-ᴘʟ 3ᴀᴜɢ-be.happy-about=3ᴀᴜɢIA ɴᴍʟᴢ1-stay-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ
‘Our cousins were happy about our living there with them.’ (15.04)

Kä nëälöbëlöle nëaolvëbëlö natüde ä nëabötëlvëlö.
kx nz-xlr-bz=lr=le
nz-aolvz-bz=lr
ѕᴜʙʀ 3ᴀᴜɢ-hear-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIA=3ᴍɪɴP
3ᴀᴜɢ1-accept-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIA
natq=de x
nz-abrtz-lvz=lr
word=3ᴍɪɴII
and
3ᴀᴜɢ-be.happy-about=3ᴀᴜɢIA
‘When they heard it they accepted his word and they were happy about it.’ (14.08)

41

Note that the first verb of this sentence has both subject and object enclitics, which happens
rarely.
7.3.1.1
Verb-compounder -lvz ‘throughout’ in slot +1
The Natqgu applicative -lvz ‘about’ has a homophonous form -lvz ‘throughout’ (shortened to
‘thruout’ for glossing), which does not increase valency. In the SGM text, there are ten instances
of each of the two -lvz forms. The ‘about’ form occurs in the earlier example (51), as well as in
the immediately prior (98). But note that in (99), it is not -lvz ‘thruout’ which triggers the 3AUG
transitive enclitic =lr, but rather the presence of the transitivizer -ti, described in 7.4. In the
context of (99), -lvz ‘thruout’ means ‘everywhere’; that is, the ants were crawling all over him.
Since slot +2 is reserved for Cᴀᴘᴘʟ and slots +3 and +4 are not compatible categories, -lvz
‘thruout’ almost certainly belongs to the +1 verb-compounding slot. The two -lvz suffixes are
distinct in meaning and function, making them two separate morphemes. See further confirming
discussion in §7.3.3.1.
Kä kölëlëbo kâ mökâ tüplökütu, sâ tëngölalvëtipelö ninge bingaö.
kx krlz-lz-bz=x

kc
mr-kc
ѕᴜʙʀ reach-Gᴅɪʀ.up-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
tq-plrkqtu=Ø
sc= tz-ngrla-lvz-ti=pe=lr

ni=nge bingar
ʀʟ-be.overgrown=3ᴍɪɴIS ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-crawl-thruout-ᴛʀ=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA
be=1ᴍɪɴII red.ant
‘When I reached where it was overgrown, many red ants crawled all over me.’ (69.44)

-ba ‘reverse’
In (100), there are two potential +2 slot forms -wi ‘middle’ discussed in §7.3.3.1 and -ba
‘reverse’,20 with -ba in focus here. Most of the verbs are in the imperative, with the 2MIN
addressee deleted. The verb ngq ‘eat’ is transitive with the object ‘something’ being understood.
Since it is already transitive -ti must be indicating a pluractional object, here, the supposedly
plentiful water. The Cᴀᴘᴘʟ -ba then licenses a locative ‘your mouth’. Taken together, ‘eat-
reverse’ means ‘vomit.’
Otim ninge, ä malebë münge, e kä töpnë-ngöde malewi ninge ä glülë ninge wü, ä sâ
tüngübatitöpebo naom, ä nim kâ tüömnüpeü lue.
oti-mq=Ø
ni=nge
x
male-bz=Ø

mq=nge
e
kx

take-Pᴅɪʀ.hither= ɪᴍᴘ be=1ᴍɪɴII
and
hold-Pᴅɪʀ.yon= ɪᴍᴘ
hand=1ᴍɪɴII
or
ѕᴜʙʀ

tr=pnz-ngr=de
male-wi=Ø
ni=nge x
glqlz=Ø
ninge
ɴᴇɢ=ᴄᴍᴘʟ-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII
hold-middle=ɪᴍᴘ be=1ᴍɪɴII and lift.up=ɪᴍᴘ
be=1ᴍɪɴII

wq
x
sc=
tq-ngq-ba-ti-tr=pe-bz=x

nao=mq
high
and
ᴘꜰᴠ
ʀʟ-eat-reverse-ᴘʟᴄᴛ -Gᴅɪʀ.in-ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI mouth=2ᴍɪɴII
x
ni=m

kc

tq-r-mnq=pe=q
lue

and
be=2ᴍɪɴII
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-drink=ᴄᴏѕ=2ᴍɪɴI
water

‘Take me, hold me by my handle, or if not that, hold me in the middle and lift me up, and
I will vomit lots into your mouth, and you will drink water.’ (ntu-072-2004-prim-sim-bhb-
040)

-c ‘across’
In (101) the verb dwa ‘jump’ is intransitive, so the Cᴀᴘᴘʟ -c ‘across’ licenses the thing that’s
jumped across, i.e. ‘the wire.’ This holds even though ‘wire’ is not overtly present following
‘jump,’ but has been mentioned in the preceding context. Given this, then, -c licenses whatever is
crossed. Note that there are two plural imperatives in (101) which are identical to the indicative
=amu 2ᴀᴜɢI and disambiguated by context.

20 This text is from a primer story by Kennedy Clq. In it a man and his personified cup have a conversation. The
man is thirsty and this is part of the cup’s response. The use of ‘vomit’ is unusual here and included for its
humorous impact.

42

Sâ tüöpipebële badö kä, “Lolvëoamu waea la ä dwaâ-aniamu.”
sc= tq-r-pi=pe-bz=le ba=dr
kx
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII
ѕᴜʙʀ
lolvz-o=amu waea
la x dwa-c-ani=amu
restrain-Gᴅɪʀ.down=2ᴀᴜɢI wire
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴘʀᴏx and jump-across-quickly=2ᴀᴜɢI
‘He said to them, “Hold that wire down and jump across it quickly.”’ (42.14)
7.3.3.1
Verb-compounder -wi ‘middle.of’ in slot +1
Looking back at example (100) in §7.3.2 there was an example of -wi ‘middle’. In it, since male
‘hold’ is transitive, -wi is not licensing the object ninge ‘me’ nor any other argument. However, in
(102), ka ‘swim’ is intransitive. It shows -wi in combination with -c ‘across,’ a frequent pairing.
In (102), -c licenses that which is crossed, as shown by (101), in this instance lue ‘river.’
Therefore, -wi ‘middle’ cannot also be licensing ‘river’ and there’s nothing else for it to license.
Taken together then, (100)-(102) demonstrate that the form -wi ‘middle’ is not applicative. Since
it precedes the Cᴀᴘᴘʟ form, it belongs to the +1 verb compounding slot, giving further credence
to the proposition that non-applicative -lvz of §7.3.1.1, is distinct from its homophone and also
belongs to slot +1.
Ëbë nigö kâ tükawicpekö lue ä tüvëtöpekö më lâlö nâ nëlu nyë skul.
zbz
ni=gr
kc
tq-ka-wi-c=pe=kr lue x
so.then
be=1ᴀᴜɢII
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-swim-middle-across=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI water
and
tq-vz-tr=pe=kr
mz
lclr
nc
nzlu nyz
skul
ʀʟ-go-Gᴅɪʀ.in=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
field
tree
coconut ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ
school
‘Then we swam across the middle of the river and went into a coconut field belonging
to the school.’ (47.12)

-ki ‘path’
The Cᴀᴘᴘʟ -ki ‘path’ is cognate with the homophonous form in Nalögo (Alfarano 2021: 460-461).
In (103), twz ‘take’ is transitive, yielding ‘the storm took the ship’ with the two nominals known
from previous context. Here, the Cᴀᴘᴘʟ -ki ‘path’ licenses a locative indicating where the storm
took the ship. In (103) the locative is filled by a complex prepositional phrase.
Twëkipälele më nâtü Nemya' kâ tüpökilëm nepi, ä twëtöle më naötökla ngö këdü nölâ
nëöpibë Nëo.
twz-ki-px=le=le

mz
nctq
Nemya'
kc
take-path-Gᴅɪʀ.out=3ᴍɪɴIA=3ᴍɪɴP
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
point.of.land
Nemya'
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
tq-prki-lz-mq

nepi
x
twz-tr=le
mz
nartrkla
ʀʟ-white-Gᴅɪʀ.up-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
sun
and
take-Gᴅɪʀ.in=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
headland
ngr kzdq
nrlc
nz-r-pi-bz Nzo

ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ a
place
ᴘᴀѕ-ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
Nzo
‘It took it out along the point of Nemya' to the east, and took it into the headland of a
place called Nzo.’ (19.07)

-plx ‘through’
In example (104), the verb ‘crawl’ is intransitive. The addition of the Cᴀᴘᴘʟ -plx ‘through’
licenses the object gone through, here the corner of a fenced pasture.
…ngölapläpäkö bute' kâ …
ngrla-plx-px=kr
bute'
kc
crawl-through-Gᴅɪʀ.out=1ᴀᴜɢI
corner.3D
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ

‘… we crawled out through the corner, …’ (47.39)

43

-sz ‘away from’
Example (105) illustrates the Cᴀᴘᴘʟ -sz ‘away.from’ which licenses the object left behind. The
same particle is used in a complex term for ‘widow’ with the verb bz ‘die,’ in olvz kxnzbzszng
‘women who were died away from.’ In (105) the group travels away from a ship named, Hygeia.
Ä sâ tëvosëpelö Aijë tülvabetöpebë ölöu.
x
sc=
tz-vo-sz=pe=lr
Aijz
and
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-travel-away.from=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA
Hygeia
tq-lvabe-tr=pe-bz=Ø
rlru
ʀʟ-float-Gᴅɪʀ.in=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIS
far
‘And they motored away from the Hygeia, [where] it floated far away.’ (19.11)

-sr ‘thusly’
The function and syntax of -sr ‘thusly’ are somewhat confusing. When combined with apu
‘be.like’ as in (106) it means ‘treat as if’ or ‘treat thusly.’ It would appear to license the object of
‘treat like’. So in sentence (106), -sr would license ‘worthless thing’. However, this analysis does
not account for the function of the peripheral applicative -ngr in the same verb which has a
similar function. There’s nothing left for it to license.
In all my data to date -sr only occurs with two verbs apu ‘be.like’ and wai ‘do’, one of
several verbs for ‘do’,21 and it also always co-occurs with -ngr, except in reflexives where one is
treating oneself like something else. See sentence (182) and this shorter example in (106).
A' leplë nëapusö-ngödö ninge bömöda.
a'
leplz
nz-apu-sr-ngr=dr

ninge
brmr.da

but
people 3ᴀᴜɢ-be.like-thusly-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴀᴜɢII
be=1ᴍɪɴII
worthless.thing

‘But people, they treat me like something worthless.’ (Psalm 22:6)
For now, I’m leaving -sr as a Cᴀᴘᴘʟ while still wondering about the function of -ngr in these
constructions. The other alternative would be to move -sr to the +1 verb-compounder slot and let
-ngr be the only applicative. But that makes it difficult to assign a meaning to the compound
apu+sr without the applicative, since they’re paired in the data. The resolution is pending.

-mi ‘with’
Comitative constructions expressing ‘with’ are generally understood to join two participants
which are expressed separately, but participate in the event equally, for example: My sister ran
with her friend in the race. In Natqgu, these are expressed by joining the participants with badr as
in example (4) where the participants are more than two, or with ncdr as in (39) for two
individual participants and both participants are encoded in the verb. A depictive, on the other
hand, is when two participants are conjoined in a ‘with’ relationship, but they do not participate
equally, such as: My sister ran with the medicines, where my sister ran, but the medicines did not
(Maslova 2007, Arkipov 2009, Næss et al, To appear).
The Natqgu depictive -mi draws the line between true comitatives and depictives at a
slightly different place. As introduced in §4.4.3, when two participants are joined by -mi, the
participant following -mi is subordinate in some way to the participant preceding -mi. The
participants differ in their responsibility or in who initiates the action and the verb encodes only
the first participant.
The depictive -mi is formally identical to cognate comitative suffixes -mi in Engdewu
(Vaa 2013: 137-138) and Nalögo. Its most likely source is the POc comitative *mai-i (or *me-i)

21 The other Natqgu verbs which can be glossed ‘do’ are the transitive verb ale ‘do, perform an action’;
intransitive rtrngz ‘do’ and the intransitive wz ‘do, make, work’. John 6:28 uses all three verbs.
Nike na-rtrngz-ti-bz=kr mz nz-ale-kr=gr

nz-wz-kr
Gct

what ɪʀʀ-do-ᴛʀ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI ᴘʀᴇᴘ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-do-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII ɴᴍʟᴢ1-work-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ God

What must we do (undertake) to do (accomplish) the deeds (works) of God?

44

(Alfarano 2021:453). The form adds an argument which undergoes the verbal action along with
the agent. In Natqgu, it occurs in two slots on the verb—in slot +2 and +10. The added argument
can be human (48), animate (107), inanimate (108), or instrumental (109).
In (107), the true comitative badr joins the narrator and his group with the crew, with
both groups having equal status; the verb taking plural inclusory marking. But -mi has the
combined group taking dogs with them for hunting, with the dogs being subordinate to the
people.
X kru nedöng nëabötë-këng, muöde vë-ëvëkö badö më …nëövëmingö kuli,...
x
kru
ne=dr-ngq
nz-abrtz-kz=ngq murde
and
crew
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl=3ᴀᴜɢII-ᴘʟ
3ᴀᴜɢ-be.happy-also=3ᴀᴜɢIS
because
vz-zvz=kr
badr mz
nz-r-vz-mi-ngr
kuli
go-always=1ᴀᴜɢI
ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-go-ᴅᴘᴠ-ɴᴍʟᴢ
dog
‘And their crew was also happy, because we kept going with them for…hunting with
dogs, …’ (20.02)
Similarly, in (108), the use of -mi means that the rain brings wind, lightning, and thunder with it,
as if they’re its subordinates and the verb takes a 3MIN enclitic. In (109), -mi has the narrator
holding a branch along with a vine that runs along it.
… tewa käetu kâ tüdâpe, vëmimü nenü, bölöpâ, ä bölömei.
tewa kxetu kc
tq-dc=pe=Ø,

vz-mi-mq=Ø
rain ѕᴜʙʀbig ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-fall=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
go-ᴅᴘᴠ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
nenq,
brlrpc x
brlrmei
wind,
lightning
and
thunder
‘… the heavy which was falling, it came with wind, lightning, and thunder.’ (51.07)

Nöla nâ bia kâ tümaleä, malemiäle kâ dëbö legou kälu esë'.
nrla
nc.bia
kc
tq-male=x
male-mi=x=le
branch
tree.breadfruit
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-hold=1ᴍɪɴI
hold-ᴅᴘᴠ=1ᴍɪɴI=3ᴍɪɴIP
kc
dzbr
legou kx-lu
esz'
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
root
creeper.climber ѕᴜʙʀ-live
one
‘That breadfruit branch I was holding, I held it with the root of a single living creeper
vine.’ (69.51)
7.3.8.1
Non-applicative –mi ‘together’
The form -mi also has a non-applicative use. When the agent is plural and no argument is added, -
mi indicates that the action is done together or in unison, as illustrated previously in (47). This use
parallels a function of its cognate mä(i) in Äiwoo (Næss et al, To appear).

-neba ‘to whom’
The final form to be discussed for the core applicatives is -neba, which occurs 13 times in the
mixed-genre Natqgu scriptures (Meabr & Yrpusz 2008), but does not occur at all in the primarily
narrative SGM text. In (110) -neba combines with the ditransitive ka ‘give’ yielding ‘to whom
God gives’, the subject being ‘God.’ Note too that the 3AUG form =ng is an object enclitic, not a
subject, since there is no 3AUG prefix accompanying it to make it a subject. See column 2 of
Table 4. In (111), the verb modified by -neba is pi ‘say’, licensing the person to whom God
spoke.
Ä leplë kä ka-nebang Gât ëmatü käetu, naölö-lëbü-ëvë-ngöbëng më nëwë-köde.
x
leplz
kx
ka-neba=ng

Gct
zmatq kx-etu

and
people ѕᴜʙʀ
give-to.whom=3ᴀᴜɢIP
God
power ѕᴜʙʀ-be.big

na-rlr-lzbq-zvz-ngr-bz=ng

mz
nz-wz-kr=de

ɪʀʀ-allow-ʀᴇꜰʟ-always-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-work-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII

45

‘And the people to whom God gives great power, must always offer themselves to his
work.’ (Luke 12:48)
Muöde töpnëngö enjöl kä öpi-neba Gât natü kâ tüpibële më Möläde kä, “Nim
Mölänge…”
murde trpnzngr
enjrl
kx
r-pi-neba

Gct
natq
kc
because none

angel
ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴍɪᴅ-say-to.whom
God
word
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
tq-pi-bz =le

mz
mrlx=de
kx
ni=m

mrlx=nge

ʀʟ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
son=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
be=2ᴍɪɴII
son=1ᴍɪɴII
‘Because there was no angel to whom God said the words which he said to his Son, “You
are My Son…”’ (Hebrews 1:5)
The identical cognate form -neba occurs in Nalögo, where Alfarano (2021:454-457) also
analyzes it as an applicative with similar functions. This form in both languages may have
developed historically from two morphemes. That is, if -neba is analyzed diachronically as as ne-
‘who’ plus ba- ‘dative base’ their combined meanings ‘who to’ correspond exactly with the
meaning of -neba. The indefinite pronominal form ne- is also attested in the forms neke ‘who’,
nelc, and nekc discussed with regard to demonstratives in Table 6. In Natqgu, ba- ‘dative base’ is
a prefix and does not occur as a free morpheme like its identical Nalögo cognate does. It is
however incorporated in another verb in possessive clauses, as discussed in 6.1.1. Given these
factors then, the -neba form may be a historical instance of pronoun incorporation, though it is
not posited elsewhere for Natqgu.
7.4 Transitivizer, -ti
The Natqgu transitivizer -ti is cognate with the identical form in Nalögo, with similar functions
(Alfarano 2021: 443-449). It is likely a reflex of POc *-i. My hypothesis for Natqgu is that a
single instance of what have been called ‘thematic consonants’ in other Oceanic languages
(Ashley 2012:131, 207-236)22 has been frozen to just this one form. The -ti transitivizer occurs in
slot +4 in the verb complex. It is in a different slot than the +2 core applicatives and the +16
peripheral applicative, so glossing it as ᴛʀ transitivizer makes its labeling distinct and narrows its
function to one which promotes something from a peripheral role, such as locative, goal,
stimulus, content, or beneficiary, to having a core function. The subject marking, then, becomes
transitive. In example (112), -ti licenses the goal nigu ‘us’ as what the devil wants to catch while
fishing.
…napimle bagu kämu döka' lâ tümwatiomle nigu më nâ ninë….
na-pi-mq=le
ba=gu kxmu
drka' lc
ɪʀʀ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=12ᴀᴜɢII how
demon ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ

tq-mwa-ti-o-mq=le
ni=gu
mz
nc.ninz
lc
ʀʟ-fish-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.down-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA be=12ᴀᴜɢII
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
tree.ngalinut
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘…he should tell us how the devil is fishing for us from the top of the ngalinut tree
[Canarium]…’ (11.19)
Other examples with the -ti transitivizer occur throughout this sketch.

Pluractional -ti
We saw previously in §7.2 that one function of r- MID is to indicate event internal plurality with a
focus on the action. Here I show that -ti also has a second pluractional function, indicating
plurality of objects on a transitive verb, often with a dispersive or scattering effect. The two
functions of -ti are in complementary distribution—one occurs with intransitives and the other
with transitives. Both occur in the same slot of the verb complex. They are analyzed as variants of

22 Ashley (2012) shows that the purported ‘thematic’ consonants are misnamed and have predictable, consistent
meanings for Sa'a [apb] which she demonstrates can also be applied to other Oceanic languages, both in
Solomon Islands and beyond.

46

each other. Recall from §5.3 that inherently semitransitive verbs require the transitivizer -ti for
the object to become specific rather than generic.
Compare the following sentences. Note that in (113), the verb takes a transitive subject
=le but does not require the -ti transitivizer.
…plamöilëmle kâ nâ tabao…
plamri-lz-mq=le
kc nc.tabao
break-Gᴅɪʀ.up-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ tree.papaya

‘…it broke off the papaya tree [Carica papaya]…’ (11.25)

Sa naplamöitibële popë' sâdö.

sa=
na-plamri-ti-bz=le

popz'
sc=dr
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-break-ᴘʟᴄᴛ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
bow
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘He will break their bows to bits.’ (Psalm 37:15)
Since plamri ‘break a stick-like object’23 is therefore transitive, the -ti in (114) with the
same verb cannot be the transitivizer and it cannot be licensing the object, since the object is
licensed by the verb’s being transitive. Therefore, it must be the pluractional -ti, ‘break their bows
to bits.’
Sentences (115) and (116) below are two consecutive Bible translation sentences. Note
that the -ti on all three verbs is analyzed as pluractional, rather than transitivizing, since the verbs
are grammatically transitive. In (115) the verb prlx ‘spread’ occurs with the transitive 3AUG
subject marker, =lr. A large crowd of people spread their second cloaks. The pluractional reading
means that individual people in the crowd each spread his/her own cloak and the spreading was
somewhat random. That is, multiple cloaks were spread around wherever people were standing.
Këdü ëbo ngö leplë käetu nëpölätiolö nëkü sâdö köali më löpëki mökâ navokipäle.
kzdq
zbo ngr
leplz
kx-etu nz-prlx-ti-o=lr

nzkq

ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ crowd ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ people ѕᴜʙʀ-big 3AUG-spread-ᴘʟᴄᴛ-Gᴅɪʀ.down=3ᴀᴜɢIA
garment
sc=dr

kra-li mz
lrpzki
mr-kc
na-vo-ki-px=le
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=3ᴀᴜɢII ᴏʀᴅ-two ᴘʀᴇᴘ
road
place-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ ɪʀʀ-travel-path-Gᴅɪʀ.out=3ᴍɪɴIA
‘A big crowd of people spread their second cloaks down on the road where Jesus would
ride along.’ (Matthew 21:8a)
Turning to (116), in the first verb we find both the detransitivizing middle particle r-
along with -ti on plamri ‘break a stick-like object,’ and having the intransitive 3AUG subject
marker =ng. The function of r- MID this instance is likely event internal plurality as seen in (95),
meaning there were multiple instances of breaking the branches. The addition of pluractional -ti
signals the plurality and random dispersal of the branches. Regarding the second verb of (116),
‘spread,’ they lay multiple branches in the road and each individual may have spread more than
one branch. Note too, that the verb also has -lvz ‘thruout’ of §7.3.1, meaning the branches
covered the road.
Ä këdung nëöplamöitipämüng nabä nâ-paam, nëpölälvëti-këlö löpëki.
x
kz-du-ng
nz-r-plamri-ti-px-mq=ng

nabx

and
ᴀᴛ-ϙɴᴛ.ᴘʟ-ᴘʟ
3ᴀᴜɢ-ᴍɪᴅ-break-ᴘʟᴄᴛ-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIS branch

nc.paam
nz-prlx-lvz-ti-kz=lr

lrpzki
tree.palm
3ᴀᴜɢ-spread-thruout-ᴘʟᴄᴛ-also=3ᴀᴜɢIA road
‘And some broke off palm branches, and also spread them all over the road.’ (Matthew
21:8b)

23 See Table 10, example d), which illustrates that the form plamri can be broken into two parts: a bound verb
form pla- ‘break’ filling slot zero on the verb complex and –mri ‘stick.like.obj’ filling the +1 compounder slot.
In combination, they refer to breaking long, thin objects, most normally sticks or bones.

47

Corbett (2000: 246-47) makes a distinction between ‘event number’ and ‘participant
number’ which is useful here in describing the event internal plurality sometimes signaled by the
middle r- and the plurality of objects indicated by -ti.
7.5 Reflexive, -lzbq, reciprocal –etr, and ‘together’ -lxblr
As noted in §4, two of the forms filling slot +8 of the Natqgu verb complex are the reflexive and
reciprocal. In the two long texts at hand, there are 19 occurrences of the reflexive -lzbq in SGM
and 901 in the Natqgu Bible translation, while there are only two occurrences of the reciprocal -
etr in SGM and 61 in the Natqgu Bible.
I show below that -lzbq and -etr decrease valency when added to normally transitive (or
bivalent) verbs. In this sense -lzbq and -etr exhibit syntactic constructions similar to the middle
prefix r-. But when added to intransitives, person-marking remains transitive. Example (56) of
§4.3.6 also illustrates -lzbq.

-Lzbq ‘reflexive’
Alfarano (2021:475) considers the cognate Nalögo morpheme =lëbu to be a possible reflex of the
POc verb *buli(ŋ) ‘roll’. Compare sentences (117) and (118), where (117) demonstrates that ka
‘give’ and tekqtr ‘exchange’ are transitive because they take the 3MIN form =le; but example
(118) with tekztr-lzbq takes the intransitive 3AUG form =ng, rather than the transitive =lr, that is,
transitivity is reduced by -lzbq.
Kabële më Söpi natekütöle Nöpakämölë kâ tüyö Matiu.
ka-bz=le mz
Srpi
na-tekqtr=le
Nrpakxmrlz
give-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
Srpi
ɪʀʀ-exchange=3ᴍɪɴIA
Good.News
kc
tq-yr Matiu
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-write Matthew
‘He assigned Srpi to translate the Gospel which Matthew wrote.’ (75.02)

Dëbede lâng li nëtekütö-lëbüng.
dzbede
lc-ng
li
nz-tekqtr-lzbq=ng
group
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
two
3ᴀᴜɢ-exchange-ʀᴇꜰʟ=3ᴀᴜɢIS
‘The two groups exchanged places, [lit. exchanged themselves].’ (37.04)
A semantically related use of -lzbq modifies sibling and in-law nouns, indicating they are
one’s own relative or perhaps better, each other’s relative. This is illustrated in example (119),
where the first four -lzbq morphemes mean ‘each other’s’ and the final one is reflexive.
Më nëmu-köde lâde, enümi ö doa sa navëpäm më ma nyëde. Kämule-esë’ töte, o läe, o
mölä, o inyä, o mële lëbü, o ile lëbü, o këdo lëbü, o lväbü lëbü, a' doa lâng amölä sa na-
aki-lëbüng më nëölängitingö ninge.
mz
nzmu-krde
lc=de

enqmi r
doa
sa=

ᴘʀᴇᴘ
this.way
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
enemy ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
person ɪᴘꜰᴠ

na-vz-px-mq=Ø

mz
ma
nyz=de
Kxmule-esz'
trte
o
ɪʀʀ-go-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
house
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=3ᴍɪɴII even.though
father
or
lxe
o
mrlx
o
inyx
o
mzle-lzbq
o
ile-lzbq
o
mother or
son
or
daughter or
brother-own
or
sister-own
or
kzdo-lzbq
o
lvxbq-lzbq

a’
doa
lc-ng

amrlx
main.in-law-own or
brideprice.in-law-own
but
person ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
all

sa=
na-aki-lzbq=ng
mz
nz-r-lxngi-ti-ngr

ninge
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-divide-ʀᴇꜰʟ=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-believe-ᴛʀ-ɴᴍʟᴢ
be=1ᴍɪɴII

‘Therefore, someone's enemy will come from his house. Even though father, or mother,
or son, or daughter, or one’s own brother, or own sister, or own father in-law, or own
mother in-law, yet all these people will divide themselves about believing in me.’
(Matthew 10:35-36)

48

-etr ‘reciprocal’
The reciprocal -etr has similar properties to -lzbq. Example (57) in §4.3.6 previously illustrated -
etr. Recall, too, that example (117) demonstrated that ka ‘give’ is transitive, taking the 3MIN =le
enclitic. Compare that to (120) which adds -etr. The verb is a semi-transitive due to r- MID, giving
it a habitual reading. It also takes the 3AUG intransitive enclitic =ng, and the licensed object da
‘thing’ is generic.
Sa naötöngëbëng nëmungö ä naöka-etöng da…
sa=
na-rtrngz-bz=ng
nz-mu-ngr
x
na-r-ka-etr=ng
da
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-do-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-eat-ɴᴍʟᴢ and
ɪʀʀ-ᴍɪᴅ-give-ʀᴇᴄᴘ=3ᴀᴜɢIS thing
‘They will make feasts and will give each other things…’ (Revelation 11:10)

Sentence (121) illustrates -lzbq and -etr in the same sentence. The verb aki ‘divide’ is
transitive. The addition of -lzbq decreases its valency and the intransitive ending =Ø is used
instead of =le. The decrease in valency is not illustrated with -etr because ota ‘fight’ is
intransitive.
Këdü kandre kënike akipä-lëbü më dëbede sâ tëota-etöpeng ä mëli käpipëne sa
naodating.
kz-dq

kandre kz-nike aki-px-lzbq=Ø
mz
dzbede

ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
country ᴀᴛ-what divide-out-ʀᴇꜰʟ=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
group

sc=
tz-ota-etr=pe=ng

x
mzli
kx
pipz-ne

ᴘꜰᴠ
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-fight-ʀᴇᴄᴘ=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS
and
time
ѕᴜʙʀ
little.bit-ɪɴᴛѕ

sa=
na-oda-ti=ng
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-destroy- ᴛʀ=3ᴀᴜɢIS

‘Whatever country divides itself into groups, they fight each other, and shortly they will
be destroyed.’ (Matthew 12:25)
7.5.2.1
Lxblr ‘together’
While -lxblr ‘together’ occurs in the same +8 slot on the verb complex, it does not change a
verb’s valency. It was discussed previously in 4.3.3 and 4.3.7 with numerous examples there.
7.6 Applicative, -ngr
For at least ten years I have been debating with myself about how many -ngr morphemes there
are in Natqgu (Boerger 2013) and what their interrelationships might be. Like Hemmings
(2013:167) encountered regarding Javanese, I also encounter here – the debate about form and
function. Is it one form with multiple meanings and functions or are there separate homophonous
forms and if so, how many?
My current understanding is that the Natqgu peripheral applicative -ngr could be a reflex
of PMP locative voice *-an (or possibly circumstantial voice *-ani). It is formally identical to
another reflex of *-an in Natqgu, the suffix of the circumfix action nominalization nz-V-ngr, but
they have different distributional constraints.24 In licensing a peripheral argument, -ngr is a
plausible reflex of the locative or circumstantial voice, which would have turned a locative or
circumstantial adjunct into the subject of the clause. This is supported by the semantic roles of
Table 12.

24 This -ngr form is also formally identical to the proprietive from §3.7.2. For the time being, I’ve analyzed the
peripheral applicative, the second half of action nominalizations, and the proprietive as separate morphemes
with distinct functions.

49

Semantic Roles Licensed by the Applicative -ngr
Example
Role
-ngr clause
New argument
109
content
He taught
About way of good person.
110, 111
locative
He sends
People home / s.t. not explicitly stated
31
stimulus
We were shocked about
Our hearing the Japanese were at Tulagi
66
reason
They lit a fire for burning
Leftover food from sacrifice
68
instrument
But you can die from
Cartridges
The Natqgu applicative -ngr occurs with all verb classes: intransitive, semitransitive,
transitive, and ambitransitive. Rather than being near the core of the verb complex like the core
applicatives and several other valency-changing morphemes, the applicative -ngr occurs at the
verb periphery, in slot +16.
The addition of -ngr in (122) and (123) correlates with a shift in enclitic subject from the
first set 3MINI =le to the second set 3MINII =de. However, when another morpheme, such as one
of the personal directionals, intervenes between -ngr and the pronominal enclitics, there is a shift
back to the first set, as shown in (124) and (125). I have yet to determine whether the motivation
for the shift back is syntactic or phonological or some combination thereof.
Alvëtöle nidö apule käöngisâ ëmatü.
alvztr=le
ni=dr

apu=le
kx-rngi-sc

zmatq
Teach=3ᴍɪɴIA be=3ᴀᴜɢII
be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA
ѕᴜʙʀ-have-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand
power
‘He taught them like someone having power.’ (Matthew 13:54)
Alvëtö-ngöde nidö më nümü ngö doa kämölë.

alvztr-ngr=de ni=dr
mz nqmq ngr
doa
kx-mrlz

teach-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII be=3ᴀᴜɢII
ᴘʀᴇᴘ way
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
child
ѕᴜʙʀ-be.good

‘He taught them about the way of a good person.’
Sâ tüatwëlö-ngöde leplë kâng mö-nyë=dö.

sc=
tq-atwzlr-ngr=de
leplz
kc-ng

mr-nyz=dr

ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-dispatch-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII
people ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-PL
place-ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=3ᴀᴜɢII

‘He sent the people to their homes.’ (Matthew 14:22)
Sa na-atwëlö-ngöbële badö.
sa=

na-atwzlr-ngr-bz=le

ba=dr

ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-dispatch-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII

‘He will send (it) to them.’
In addition to (123)–(125), a number of -ngr (peripheral) applicatives have been
illustrated previously. While much more could be said about the applicative -ngr, further details
are left for future investigations. Readers are referred to chapter 13 of Alfarano (2021), with its
significant detail about the form -ngö in Nalögo, which is cognate in form and most functions.
7.7 Passive, nz->V<=Ø
Based on data from Bola [bnp] and Natqgu, Van den Berg and Boerger (2011), argue for the
presence of an agentless passive in POc of the form *-in- ~ *ni-. Natqgu nz- PAS contributed to
that conclusion. In the discussion here I add new examples from the SGM text.
We’ve already seen two other functions of the verbal prefix nz-, the third person
augmented prefix (Table 4) and the prefix of the circumfix action nominalizer (§3.3.2). The third
function of nz- is as a passivizer when there is no third person augmented enclitic or subject; and
for action nominalizations, when there is no 3AUG representation. So nz-V-Ø is the form of the
agentless passive in Natqgu. The na- ‘irrealis’ and portmanteau prefix tz- ‘realis 3AUG’ can also
indicate passive in the absence of a 3AUG enclitic.

50

These characteristic are illustrated in the next three sentences, all of which have agentless
passives, with the original subject no longer being part of the construction. The missing agents
are indicated by =Ø in these examples, but are normally left blank in glossing. Example (126) has
two examples of nz- passive. In both of them, nz- does not co-occur with either a 3AUG subject or
the nominalizing suffix, leaving passive as the only remaining analysis for the function of nz-.
…muöde nëwöde köali lâpe nëdwatö-kögö me nëatupä-ngöm müngö da kä nëangio.
murde nzwr=de
kra-li lc=pe nz-dwa-tr-kr=gr

me
because time=3ᴍɪɴII
ᴏʀᴅ-two ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=ᴄᴏѕ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-jump-Gᴅɪʀ.in-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII place
nz-a-tu-px-ngr-mq=Ø
mqngr da
kx
nz-angio=Ø
ᴘᴀѕ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-stand-Gᴅɪʀ.out-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=ᴘᴀѕ
image thing
ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴘᴀѕ-worship=ᴘᴀѕ
'…because that was the second time of our entering a place where images were
erected that were worshipped.' (06.15)
Example (127) illustrates the passive with tz-, in the form tz-amc-ti-ngr=Ø=de. In
Natqgu’s agentless passives, the agent is deleted. So the =de which remains is the former object
promoted to subject of the passive. It is from the set II enclitics (Table 4), due to its following
-ngr ‘applicative.’ This illustrates Siewierska’s (2005:434) third criterion for passives which is
that the subject of the passive, if there is one, must correspond to the direct object of the active.
Note also that -ngr licenses ‘for’ in the phrase ‘be hired for’ as discussed in §7.6.
…më nëbütö-köde dökü ngö këdung ma lâdeng tëamâti-ngöde, amwititäpwële nâ tea
ngödö, töpeleu më nüvi.
mz
nz-bq-tr-kr=de drkq
ngr kzdung ma
ᴘʀᴇᴘ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-shut-Gᴅɪʀ.in-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII wall
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
ᴀᴛ-ϙɴᴛ.ᴘʟ-ᴘʟ house

lc=de-ng

tz-amc-ti-ngr=de
a-mwi-ti-tx-pwz=le
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII-ᴘʟ
ʀʟ.ᴘᴀѕ-hire-ᴛʀ-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII
ᴄᴀᴜѕ-connect-ᴛʀ-ɪɴᴛѕ-just=3ᴍɪɴIA
nc.tea
ngr=dr tr-pe=le-u
mz
nqvi
tree.fern
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ=3ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴇɢ-tie =3ᴍɪɴIA-ɴᴇɢ
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
rope
‘…in his shutting the walls of some of those houses he was hired for, he fitted together
the fern trees [Cyathea vittata], rather than tying them with rope.’ (10.06)
In (128), there are three passives, two signaled by na- IRR and one by tz-.
…älöbo nëöpi-köde kä naäpe nide ä nakabë bade töau kâ tëkabë Kirakira më
temë käesë'.
xlr-bz=x nz-r-pi-kr=de kx
na-xpe=Ø
hear-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-say-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ.ᴘᴀѕ-pay=ᴘᴀѕ
ni=de
x
na-ka-bz=Ø ba=de
trau kc

be=3ᴍɪɴII
and
ɪʀʀ.ᴘᴀѕ-give-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=ᴘᴀѕ ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
money ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ

tz-ka-bz=Ø

Kirakira
mz
temz kx-esz'
ʀʟ.ᴘᴀѕ-give-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=ᴘᴀѕ
Kirakira
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
moon ѕᴜʙʀ-one
‘…I heard him saying that he should be paid and he should be given the money that is
given in Kirakira [capital of Makira province] for one month.’ (75.12)
The next two agentless passive sentences contrast. In (129), which occurs as the section
heading to episode 57, the free pronoun ninge ‘I/me’ is the object promoted to subject. But in first
sentence of the episode, the same statement is reiterated with the enclitic =nge 3MINII serving the
same role, illustrating that free pronouns and enclitics can both be promoted to subjects of
passives.
Nëatwëlö Ninge Pawa Skul.
nz-atwzlr=Ø
ni=nge
Pawa Skul
ᴘᴀѕ-dispatch=ᴘᴀѕ
be=1ᴍɪɴII
Pawa.school
‘I am sent to Pawa School.’ (57.00)

51

Nëatwëlönge Pawa Skul më temë Jenwëri 1944.
nz-atwzlr=Ø=nge
Pawa skul
mz
temz Jenwzri
1944.
ᴘᴀѕ-dispatch=ᴘᴀѕ=1ᴍɪɴII
Pawa.school
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
month January
1944.
‘I was sent to Pawa School in January 1944.’ (57.01)
Example (131) is a recent discovery and the only one of its type identified to date. In it,
the verb ‘give’ is in the passive form with nz- passive marker and =Ø marking subject, i.e. the
expected agentless passive. However, the fronted NP ‘those demons’ has to be the passive agent.
It is no longer the subject of ‘give’ because it does not follow the verb nor is there a 3AUG enclitic
=lr. Furthermore, since fronting is marked for Natqgu’s transitive VAO sentences, the role ‘those
demons’ must be the only instance to date of a passive agent, hence the English translation ‘by
those demons’. Similarly, ‘bad ways and bad thinking’ is the former direct object now promoted
to subject.
Döka' lâng nëökabë badö nümü kätöka ä dötwö kätöka.
drka'
lc-ng
nz-r-ka-bz=Ø
ba=dr nqmq
demon
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
ᴘᴀѕ-ᴍɪᴅ-give-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=ᴘᴀѕ
ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII
way
kx-trka
x
drtwr kx-trka
ѕᴜʙʀ-bad
and
mind ѕᴜʙʀ-bad
‘Bad ways and bad thinking are given to them by those demons.’ (13.10)
8. Tense, aspect, and mood
This section discusses Natqgu strategies for encoding tense, aspect, and mood. Since Natqgu does
not have morphological tense, temporal reference is often indicated by temporal adverbs. As in
§8.1. Aspect and mood markers occur in slots -4, -2, and +13 of the verb complex, as seen in §4.
8.1 Temporal expressions
Natqgu temporal reference is normally expressed by free temporal morphemes like mzli ka ‘now’,
bq ‘yesterday’, zbq ka ‘today,’ kalrla ‘tomorrow,’ and similar adverbs or expressions, as
illustrated by (132), or is understood by context once the temporal setting has been established.
Nepwëli këdü distrik ngö Tömâtu Nedö mëli kâ bünâ.
Nepwzli kz-dq distrik
ngr Nedr
mzli
kc bqnc
Nepwzli.district ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ district
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
Santa Cruz
time
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ long.ago.
'’Nepwzli was a district of Santa Cruz long ago.’ (01.08)
In addition, the enclitic aspect particle =pnz ‘completive’ can have the sense of a (distant)
past tense because things which have already happened must have occurred in the past. See §8.4.
8.2 Proclitic Aspect
The -4 proclitic aspect slot is filled by one of three forms: sa= ‘imperfective’, sc= ‘perfective’
and ma= ‘lest.’ I look at ma= first, since the other two are more complex. Then, since the
proclitic aspect forms always co-occur with a following mood prefix from slot -3, I first discuss
the mood prefixes in §8.3 which can occur independently and do not require an aspect proclitic to
be grammatical, before giving examples. Then in §8.4 I discuss the enclitic aspect of slot +13.
Following the discussion of the all forms, in §8.5 I give extensive examples, discussing both the
normal combinations of aspect and mood, as well as the less common combinations and what
they mean.

ma= ‘lest’
The apprehensive proclitic ma= ‘lest’ is illustrated by sentence (133). The reason ma= is
considered part of the proclitic aspect category is that it usually follows murde ‘because’ and
always precedes a realis mood prefix, normally in the fixed phrase murde ma RL ‘because lest
REALIS.’ Out of ten total occurrences, only two ma= sentences in the SGM text, 22.07 and 51.04,
do not include murde. This analysis as an aspect marker is somewhat tentative since there is little

52

variation in its use to unveil other possible hypotheses, but there is also no counter-evidence to
the current hypothesis.
…mwelötä-ëlwëkö, muöde ma tüöpnalëm dü lâsu më newë kâ tümnâ-ngögö.
mwelr-tx-zlwz=kr
murde ma= tq-rpna'-lz-mq
fear-ɪɴᴛѕ-very=1ᴀᴜɢI because lest
ʀʟ-shoot-Gᴅɪʀ.up-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
dq
lcsu
mz
newz
kc
tq-mnc-ngr=gr
ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
ship
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
mountain
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-stay-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=1ᴀᴜɢII
‘…we were very frightened, lest a ship shoot up there into the mountain where we
lived.’ (39.12)

sa= ‘imperfective’ and sc= ‘perfective’
The other two proclitic aspect forms are sa= ‘imperfective,’ meaning an activity has not yet
occurred, which sometimes gives it a future sense, along with sc= ‘perfective,’ meaning an
activity has begun. The state of completion indicated by sc= depends on other TAM particles, but
it sometimes indicates a past event. These two occur more frequently than ma= and with more
variation.
8.3 Prefixal mood, tq- ‘realis’ and na- ‘irrealis’
Natqgu encodes both realis and irrealis moods in the -2 verb complex slot. Realis mood is
indicated by either tq- as in example (1) or tz- its ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ portmanteau counterpart, in example
(10). Realis mood indicates that the verbal action takes place in the real world in the present or
past. It is not potential, but actual. In Natqgu, one function of realis mood is to track the story line
in narrative texts, leaving stative verbs and any accompanying or background information
unmarked for mood.
Irrealis mood can indicate future (74), hypothetical, intentional, hortative (91), imperative
(51), conditional (21), and potential (41). Natqgu na- is derived from POc *na ‘irrealis’.
8.4 Enclitic aspect
Slot +13 has four enclitics encoding aspect. Two of these are illustrated elsewhere, =be ‘still’ in
(94) and =ka ‘not yet’ in (60). Of interest in the section that follows are the other two enclitics
=pe ‘change of state’ and =pnz ‘completive’ were both illustrated in (59).

=pe ‘change-of-state’
Tracking with Alfarano’s discussion of Nalögo (2021:30), the meaning or sense of =pe COS in
Natqgu is also determined by what verb class it combines with, as well as the temporal setting of
a discourse. With perfective verbs it expresses either a change of state from a previous negative
state to a positive one; or with telic verbs, the resulting state following the endpoint of the event
causing it. But with atelic verbs, =pe indicates a completed event, giving the sense of ‘already.’
In combination with the imperfective the enclitic expresses an imminent meaning with telic
punctual verbs. In negative contexts it has the sense of ‘not anymore.’ Negative uses are explored
in §9, Table 14.
Also like Nalögo’s cognate change-of-state marker =p(m)e (Alfarano 2021:341-42),
Natqgu =pe, as well as =pnz ‘completive’ combine not only with verbs, but also form predicates
through attachment to nouns in weather terms as in example (80b) and free pronouns as in (134)
and (135), always recalling the ‘be’ or ‘become’ basis for these. Also paralleling Nalögo, =pe
occurs on non-predicate forms, such as demonstratives. See Table 6 discussion in §3.4.
Ëbë sâ tüwaipele tünginipenge köaesë'më.
zbz
sc=
tq-wai=pe=le
tq-ngini=pe=nge
kra-esz'mz.
so.then
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-do=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIA
ʀʟ-become=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴍɪɴII
sixth.
‘So then that's how I became the sixth.’ (47.06)

53

Ëbë sâ tüöpipem läede nanginipegö nâdö.
zbz sc= tq-r-pi=pe-mq lxe=de na-ngini=pe=gr ncdr
then ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither mother=3ᴍɪɴII ɪʀʀ-become=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴅᴜ
‘Then her mother told me the two of us should go together.’ (69.08)
8.5 TAM particles in combination

Normal pairings: sc= tq- ‘perfective+realis’ and sa= na- ‘imperfective+irrealis’
Note the uses of aspect and mood forms in (136). There is sc= from aspect slot -4, both na- and
tq- from mood slot -2, as well as two of the four +13 enclitic aspect forms, =be and =pe.
Sentences (136) and (137) illustrate the normal pairings of the most frequent aspect and mood
particles occurring before the verb root, with (136) showing the sc= tq- pairing of perfective and
realis, while (137) illustrates the sa= na- pairing of imperfective and irrealis. These pairings are
semantically compatible based on real world logic. That is, one expects imperfective things to be
under way, but not yet concluded and future things to not yet have happened.
Yâbepü lang ëbü tü, ä lâsu kâ naötwëm dëtu ami kâng na-aglüamu sâ tükaputöpem.
Yc=be-mq la-ngq zbq
tq, x
lcsu
kc
stay=still-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴘʀᴏx-ᴘʟ
day
three,
and
ship
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
na-rtwz-mq dztu
ami
kc-ng

na-a-glq=amu sc=
ɪʀʀ-take-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
things
army
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
ɪʀʀ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-carry=2ᴀᴜɢI
ᴘꜰᴠ=
tq-kapu-tr=pe-mq=Ø
ʀʟ-happened-Gᴅɪʀ.in=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘There are still three days, and [then] the ship for taking the army supplies you must
carry is arriving.’ (51.01)
Sa naomimâ më nouöla, bea ä milëpü da kä nangünamu.
sa na-o-mi-mq=x mz
nourla
bea x
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-go-ᴅᴘᴠ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
morning
midday and
milzpq
da
kx
na-ngq=amu.
evening
thing
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-eat=2ᴀᴜɢI.
'I will bring with me morning, noon, and night things for you to eat.’ (51.05)

sa= tq- ‘imperfective + realis’
A further twist to the TAM situation occurs when the normal pairings of aspect and mood are
reversed. When the relative certainty of a future event in the future is high, the imperfective pairs
with realis mood, sa= tq-. In the SGM text, there are only four examples of sa= tq- and they are
all in the same speech act phrase, “Sa tqmrlz” meaning, ‘It’ll be alright,’ one of which is given in
(138). Here it occurs with ye ‘anyway’ a particle indicating contra-expectation.
Ä öpimle kä, “Sa tümölë ye.”
x
r-pi-mq=le
kx
sa
tq-mrlz
ye.”
and
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ʀʟ-be.good
anyway.”
'And he said to me, “It’ll be alright anyway.”’ (29.09)
The same combination is used in the next two sentences, which come from books of the
Bible translated by Mr. Simon. Such pairings are rare and occurred completely under his
authorship, since I didn’t know the contexts for switching the normal pairings or even that they
could be switched. In (139) =pe COS adds the sense ‘already.’ But the same pairing in (140) does
not require =pe, probably due to the presence of mzli ka ‘now.’
Mëli ö nöpö ngö nöanâ sa tüesopem.
mzli r
nrpr
ngr
nranc sa=
tq-eso=pe-mq=Ø

time ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
season ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
fruit
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ʀʟ-near=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS

‘The time of the season of fruit is already approaching.’ (Matthew 13:28)

54

Sa tüoliütile mëli ka nëangângö leplë më nyö ngö nëayöplapängö.
sa=
tq-oliqti =le

mzli
ka

nz-angc-kr=de

ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ʀʟ-prepare.for=3ᴍɪɴIA
time
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴘʀᴏx
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-burn-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
leplz
mz
nyr
ngr
nz-a-yrplapx-ngr

people
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
fire ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-wise-ᴀᴘᴘʟ

‘He is prepared now for burning people in the fire of punishment.’ (Matthew 3:10)

sc= na- ‘perfective + irrealis’
There were no contexts in SGM requiring the sc= na- pairing, so once again scripture texts he
translated are used for illustration purposes. Perfective aspect pairs with irrealis mood, sc= na- in
(141) and (142). These indicate that the action is so certain to happen in the immediate future that
it might as well have already happened, leading to the ‘about to’ phrase in the English
translations. Both sentences also have =pe COS. Example (141) is fairly straightforward, but the
idioms in (142) warrant clarification. The idiom ‘where one’s neck shoots’ means one’s will or
plan and ‘to cause something to stand in’ means to fulfill or accomplish it.
Inyänge yagoä ä sâ nabëpe.
inyx=nge

yagox=Ø
x
sc=
na-bz=pe=Ø

daughter=1ᴍɪɴII
be.sick=3ᴍɪɴIS
and
ᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-die=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS

‘My daughter is sick and she’s about to die.’ (Mark 5:23)

A' këdü ëbü mökâ tüpnë dötwö Herodiës më nënibü-köde Jon sâ natutöpe.
a'
kz-dq

zbq
mr-kc
tq-pnz neck
Herodizs
mz

but
ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
day
place-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ ʀʟ-shoot mind
Herodias
ᴘʀᴇᴘ

nz-nibq-kr=de

Jon
sc=
na-tu-tr =pe=Ø
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-kill-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
John
ᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-stand-Gᴅɪʀ.in=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS

‘But one day Herodias’ plan to kill John was about to be fulfilled.’ (Mark 6:23)
One final example closes §8. Normally only the first part of the negative circumfix, tr>
comes between the aspect proclitc and mood prefix. Here we see the usual sc= tq- pairing, but
with material between them. In fact, in (143) Mr. Simon has an entire fronted NP (underlined)
between them. This is the only such occurrence in the data. I rechecked the hand-written
manuscript and this accurately represents what he wrote. There was no crossing out or arrows,
which he did when editing other parts. This is so unusual that for the illustrated, printed Natqgu
book of Simon’s story I edited it to be more natural, moving sc= to follow the underlined NP.
This makes it easier for new and hesitant readers to process.
Kä yököpäbo kâ më Sosaeti, sâ doa lö Nepa' ä Pa'lë tëmâpäpelö ninge kä nanginibo
käaonöwä më mëtea lâng li.
kx yrkrpx-bz=x kc
mz
Sosaeti
ѕᴜʙʀ complete-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
Society
sc=
doa
lr Nepa' x
Pa'lz
tz-mcpx=pe=lr
ninge
ᴘꜰᴠ=
person ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
Nepa' and
Pa'lz
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-choose=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA be=1ᴍɪɴII
kx na-ngini-bz=x

kx-a-o-nrwx mz mztea lc-ng
li
ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-become- Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
ѕᴜʙʀ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-go-peace ᴘʀᴇᴘ village ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
two
‘When I finished at Society, the people of Nepa' and Pa'lz villages chose me that I might
become a peacemaker for those two villages.’ (71.01)

55

9. Negation
Negation is variously represented, depending on what is negated. In Table 13, I summarize what
has been said about negation to this point. Then I move on to complex negative existentials.

Negative forms
Negation form
Meaning
Properties
Section
bzkq
‘ do notʼ
Negative imperative
6.2.4
tr>...<u
‘not...notʼ
Discountinuous negators occurring with simple
verbal clauses; the most common form of negation
6.3
tr>...<ka
‘not...yetʼ
Combination of the negator tr- and aspect particle
=ka ‘(not) yetʼ
6.3
trtingr
‘noʼ
Negator (with NPs and predicate nominals); Negative
answer to Polar Questions
6.2.6
9.1 Negative existential predicates with tr-__-ngr
In addition to standard negation and the other morphemes of Table 13, Natqgu forms complex
negative existential predicates by combining three morphemes: the negative prefix tr- of the -4
slot, plus an aspect form from slot +13, followed by the applicative -ngr of slot +16. I analyze
these forms as having a zero copula in the verb root slot since otherwise a prefix is attaching to an
enclitic, which does not happen elsewhere in the language.

Complex negative existentials
English
Natqgu
-4
0
+13
+16

NEG
verb
aspect
APPL
Not any __/none
trpnzngr
tr-
Ø
=pnz ‘completive’
-ngr
Not any more __
trpengr
tr-
Ø
=pe ‘change-of-state’
-ngr
Not any __ yet
trgalr
tr-
Ø
[=ga] is /=ka/ ‘not yet’
[-lr] is/-ngr/
The third form in column +13 is =ga in trgalr ‘never.’ I propose that the underlying form
of trgalr is /tr-=ka-ngr/, where =ga as a voiced allomorph of =ka ‘(not) yet,’ which is already a
slot +13 lexeme. The voicing is possibly motivated by making the first two syllables of this word
maximally opposed to the common word trka ‘bad’. While voiced stops are optionally
prenasalized in Natqgu, with the oldest generation always prenasalizing, the middle-aged group
sometimes prenasalizing, and the youngest group rarely prenasalizing, in this word
prenasalization is uniformly present.
I also posit that [-lr] is an allomorph of the applicative /-ngr/. Voicing of the [k] to
(prenasalized) [g] creates the environment for dissimilation to occur by morphophonemic rule #5,
which disprefers two consecutive one-syllable morphemes starting with either two homorganic
nasals or a nasal and its homorganic voiced stop, as previously illustrated in examples (5a) and
(5b). The choice of [l] as the dissimilated sound is consistent with either [l] or [n] being inserted
epenthetically between morphemes with same vowel conjunctions, as in morphophonemic rule
#1, and is maximally opposed to [ŋg] because [l] is both non-nasal and non-velar.
These forms are illustrated by the following sentences. The function of the applicative
forms in column +16 is to license the NP of which there is ‘none.’ So in (144) the -ngr of
trpnzngr ‘none’ licenses ‘our knife.’
Nëvëne-kögö lâ töpnë'ngö sâgö toki.
nz-vz-ne-kr=gr

lc trpnzngr sc=gr

toki
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-go- ᴅѕᴛʀ-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ none ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=1ᴀᴜɢII
knife
‘On our trip we had no knife.’ (03.08)

56

Examples (145) and (146) occur at the end of a story about a severe cyclone. (145) has
two examples of trpengr ‘not.anymore’, one as a single word which licenses ‘fruit from trees.’
Më nëngi-töpengökö nounâ kä tuti, utâ ngö peto nëbëti-läblöng muöde töpengö nöa
nounâ kä nangüdö.
mz nz-ngi-trpengr-kr nounc kx tu-ti
utc
ngr
peto
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-be-not.anymore-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ tree ѕᴜʙʀ stand-ᴛʀ
bird
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
bush
nz-bz-ti-lxblr=ngq
murde trpengr nra nounc kx na-ngq=dr
3ᴀᴜɢ1-die-ᴘʟᴄᴛ-together=3ᴀᴜɢIS because not.anymore fruit tree ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-eat=3ᴀᴜɢII
‘From there being no trees standing anymore, the birds of the bush all died because
there was not anymore fruit on the trees for them to eat.’ (12.10)
The other trpengr of (145) is incorporated into an action nominalization, with this being
the only example of such a form in the data. The nominalization is interesting because it requires
the addition of ngi ‘be’ even though I’ve posited an underlying ‘be’ in trpengr. Furthermore, -ngr
in trpengr and -kr in the nominalization both license the same thing, that is, ‘trees that were
standing’. This likely illustrates that speakers think of these forms as single grammaticalized
units, rather than being synchronically composed of three (or four) morphemes. A similar process
happened in English with ‘not one’ becoming ‘none.’
Sentence (146) illustrates trgalr ‘never’ with the -lr (-ngr) applicative licensing the clause
headed by ‘cyclone.’ So ‘not any yet’ or ‘none to date’ means it never happened in the past.
Abëo më nibö nounenü lâde, vë kölëmle mëli ka, tögalö nounenü käetu kä mâlä kä
apule kölâde.
abzo mz
nibr nounenq lc=de

vz
krlz-mq=le
start ᴘʀᴇᴘ
after
cyclone ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
go
reach-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
mzli ka

trgalr nounenq
kx-etu
kx
mc=x
kx
time ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴘʀᴏx
never
cyclone
ѕᴜʙʀ-big
ѕᴜʙʀ
see=1ᴍɪɴI
ѕᴜʙʀ
apu=le
kr-lc=de.
be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA
ʀᴘʀɴ2-ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
‘From after that cyclone, going until now, there’s never been a big cyclone that I’ve
seen that was like that one.’ (12.12)
Alfarano analyzes cognate forms as negative predicates in Nalögo (2021:530-532) and
this negative predicate analysis is consistent with what Vaa says about Engdewu:
“Another way of expressing negation is by a morpheme tobi, which seems related to
the NEG1 particle form to. It always appears first in the clause. Since tobi often
appears preceding a noun, it may be a negative predicate meaning something like
‘there is no’” (Vaa 2013: 405).
10. Complex clause types
In §10 I discuss complex clauses, the three subordinate clause types of complements, relatives,
and adverbials, as well as coordinate clauses. The syntax and constraints of Natqgu are very
similar to Nalögo (Alfarano 2021), but Natqgu has only one particle kx which functions as a
subordinator in both complement and relative clauses. This is unlike Nalögo which has nge and
kä, both glossed as complementizers.
10.1 Complement clauses
Complement clauses in Natqgu can be finite or non-finite and are usually introduced by the
subordinator kx. Finite complementation involves clause complements, while non-finite clauses
involve nominalizations.

57

Finite complement clauses
In Natqgu, these finite sentence-like complement clauses follow the matrix clause. Verbal
inflections on the matrix and complement predicates are independent from one another. Two
predicate types which show finite clause complementation are illustrated in (147), that of the
contents of utterances and knowledge. So, ‘he said to him that…’ introduces the direct quote
which follows. Likewise, within the quote is the second complement clause, ‘you can…’ plus the
complement clause ‘healing me.’25 Note that krlz can mean either ‘know’ or ‘able,’ and that the
italicized phrase has a non-finite complement with krlz plus nominalization as in §10.1.2. Also
noteworthy is the third kx which introduces the premise, ‘If you are willing…’ illustrating a
different sense of subordinator kx which means ‘if’, ‘whether’, ‘since’ or ‘when’.
…öpibële bade kä, “Kä tüsuti dötwöm le, kölëä kä kölëü nëamölëngö ninge!”
r-pi-bz=le

ba=de
kx
kx
tq-suti drtwr=mq=le

ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
ѕᴜʙʀ
ʀʟ-want neck=2ᴍɪɴII=3ᴍɪɴP

krlz=x
kx
krlz=q
nz-a-mrlz-ngr

ni=nge
know=1ᴍɪɴI
ѕᴜʙʀ
be.able=2ᴍɪɴI
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-be.good-ɴᴍʟᴢ
be=1ᴍɪɴII

‘…he said to him, “If you want to, I know you can heal me!”’ (Matthew 8:2)

Other complement clauses are found expressing propositional attitude ‘it seemed’ in
(148), desire ‘I decided’ in (149), and perception ‘we heard’ in (150). Fear complements such as,
‘I fear that…’ occur, but are not illustrated. In (149), aoti drtwr is one of the plethora of idioms
using ‘neck’ for the mind, here meaning to decide to do something.
Da kä kâtitäpää më tewa lâde etu, opäm kä dövö-ngögö kâ aböelë käetu.
da kx
kcti-tx-px=x
mz
tewa
lcde
etu

thing ѕᴜʙʀ
marvel-ɪɴᴛѕ-Gᴅɪʀ.out=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
rain
there
big

opxm kx
drvr-ngr=gr
kc
abrelz
kx-etu
seems ѕᴜʙʀ
cover.from.rain-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
umbrella
ѕᴜʙʀ-big
‘What surprised me very much in that big rain, was it seemed that we were covered by
a big umbrella.’ (29.16)

… aoti dötwönge kä mölë nëöyö-köbo, më nëaopä-köbo bam da lâng amölä.
ao-ti
drtwr=nge
kx
mrlz
nz-r-yr-kr-bz=x

mz
think-ᴛʀ mind=1ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
be.good ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-riteɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
nz-a-opx-kr-bz=x

ba=m da lc-ng
amrlx
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-clear-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
ᴅᴀᴛ=2ᴍɪɴII thing ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
all

‘I decided that it’d be good for me to write to make all these things clear to you.’ (Luke
1:3)
…älökö kä lö Japan nëokatöpelö Jëmëne ä lö Merikë ä Rasia nëokatöpelö Inglan.
xlr=kr
kx
lr Japan
nz-okatr=pe=lr Jzmzne

hear=1ᴀᴜɢI
ѕᴜʙʀ-
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ Japan
3ᴀᴜɢ-help=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA
Germany

x
lr Merikz
x
Rasia nz-okatr=pe=lr Inglan
and
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
America
and
Russia
3ᴀᴜɢ-help=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIA
England
‘…we heard that the Japanese were helping Germany and the Americans and Russians
were helping England.’ (36.01)
The predicate of knowledge krlz ‘know’ can use interrogative complementizers instead of
kx to introduce finite complement clauses, as illustrated in (151). Other types of predicates may
also exhibit this type of complementation, but they have not yet been identified. In (151),
Simon’s father is instructing him about how to make sacrifices to a god and how to tell if the god
has been appeased. The phrase with krlz ‘know’ is passive and nike ‘what’ introduces ‘what is

25 Actually a- CAUS plus mrlz ‘good’ can also have two meanings, either ‘bless’ or ‘heal’ depending on context
and what is being ‘caused good’ to.

58

bad about his thinking.’ The phrase da kx ‘thing which’ could be grammatically substituted for
nike in this sentence.
Nëmu dötwöde kä tümölë-moule, nëkölëtöpë nike tütökangö dötwöde.
nzmu drtwr=de
kx
tq-mrlz-mou=le

if mind=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
ʀʟ-goodagain=3ᴍɪɴIA

nz-krlz-tr-pz

nike
tq-trka-ngr
drtwr=de
ᴘᴀѕ-know-Gᴅɪʀ.in-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
what
ʀʟ-bad-ᴀᴘᴘʟ
mind=3ᴍɪɴII
‘If his thinking is good again, it will be known what is bad about his thinking.’ (08.08)

Non-finite complement clauses
Instead of using the subordinator kx, non-finite complements involve nominalizations.
Complements of phasal predicates occur exclusively as nominalizations. But of the predicate
types discussed above, achievement, desiderative and fear predicates occur with both
complementation types.
Phasal predicates focus on different phases of an action or a state, such as its inception,
continuation or termination, such as ‘begin’, ‘continue’, ‘finish.’ Examples (152) and (153)
illustrate phasal predicates with nominalization complements.
Yëutökö nësiklungö më temë Oktobë 1943.
yzu-tr=kr nz-siklu-ngr mz
temz Oktobz 1943
begin-Gᴅɪʀ.in=1ᴀᴜɢI
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-be.schooled-ɴᴍʟᴢ ᴘʀᴇᴘ
moon October 1943
‘We began being schooled in the month of October 1943.’ (56.06)

Yököpäbë nëköka'-köde…
yrkr-px-bz=Ø
nz-krka'-kr=de
finish-Gᴅɪʀ.out-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIS ɴᴍʟᴢ1-pray-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
‘He finished his praying…’ (23.12)
Example (155) illustrates an achievement predicate ‘try’ with a nominalized complement.
Daniel Boerger abë-kële këdu nëöyöngö më vaol lâdeng.
Daniel Boerger abz-kz=le kzdu nzryrngr
mz
vaol
lc=de-ng.
Daniel Boerger try-also=3ᴍɪɴIA some writing
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
vowel
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII-ᴘʟ.
‘Daniel Boerger also tried some writings [symbols] for those vowels.’ (79.09)
10.2 Relative clauses
In this section I describe the characteristics of relative clauses (RC) in Natqgu with examples
enclosed in various kinds of bracketing explained below and the relativizing particle in a bold
font. Natqgu’s RCs are introduced either by the subordinator kx or when the NP being modified is
known in the discourse, by the demonstrative kc. RCs follow the NP they modify.
Sentences (155) and (156) are consecutive sentences in SGM episode 3. Recall from §3.7
that Natqgu lacks many true adjectives and relativizes stative verbs to express characteristics of
referents. Such a simple relative clause is illustrated in (155) with the head noun newz ‘hill’
modified by ‘very small.’ In (156), there are three RCs and three levels of embedding. The largest
in curly brackets tells what the house contained; the next two RCs describe the demon images, as
indicated by the square brackets with two separate parenthetical RCs within it.
Nâ noli kâ tu-aepëtö më nou këdü newë kätopwëne.
nc.noli kc
tu-aepz-tr=Ø
mz
nou
kz-dq
tree.hogplum ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
stand-near-Gᴅɪʀ.in=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
base
ᴀᴛ-ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
[newz
kx-topwz-ne]
mountain
ѕᴜʙʀ-little-ɪɴᴛѕ
‘The hog plum trees [Spondias cythere] were near the base of a very small hill.’ (03.04)

59

Ä më naö newë lâde tuom elö ma kä tutipä-ngöm müngö döka' käkülu kä nëangiolö lö
Mëdämingö.
x
mz
nar
newz lc=de
tu-o-mq
elr
and
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
head
mountain ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII stand-Gᴅɪʀ.down-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
therein
{ma kx
tu-ti-px-ngr-mq=Ø
[(mqngr
drka' kx-kqlu)
house ѕᴜʙʀ
stand-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.out-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS image demon ѕᴜʙʀ-many

(kx nz-angio=lr lr Mzdxmingr)]}
ѕᴜʙʀ 3ᴀᴜɢ-worship=3ᴀᴜɢIA
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ
Mzdxmingr.village
‘And at the top of that mountain there stood a building that contained many statues of
demons in it, which the Mzdxmingr villagers worshiped.’ (03.05)
A few sentences later in the same episode we find (157). I include the entire sentence here
to demonstrate the complexity of the sentences composed by Mr. Simon, as well as to illustrate
two RCs. The first of the two RCs is in square brackets and illustrates the demonstrative kc as the
relativizing particle. This occurs because four sentences previously in the story, (example 155),
the building standing on the top of the hill was introduced. Since it is a known entity, when it is
relativized on here the demonstrative kc is used instead of kx. In Oceanic, relativizers and
demonstratives often have similar or the same forms, as well as an overlap in functions (Lynch et
al. 2002:53, Early 2009).
The second RC, also in parentheses, is the last clause of the sentence. The subordinator kx
modifies ‘knife,’ introducing an irrealis purpose phrase telling what they want to use the knife
for. In that phrase, the applicative -ngr adds the sense of ‘with’ or ‘with which.’
Kä mâlëkö ma kâ tütuom më newë lâ, sâ tüöpipem Lölvë navëdëkö elö muöde
naölätöpëkö toki kä naöyëkö-ngögö noli.
(kx mc-lz=kr
[ma kc
tq-tu-o-mq=Ø
ѕᴜʙʀ see-Gᴅɪʀ.up=1ᴀᴜɢI
house
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-stand-Gᴅɪʀ.down-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
mz newz lc,])
sc=
tq-r-pi=pe-mq
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
hill
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴍɪᴅ-say=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
Lrlvz na-vz-dz=kr elr
murde na-rlx-tr-bz=kr
Lrlvz ɪʀʀ-go-Gᴅɪʀ.up=1ᴀᴜɢI
therein so.that ɪʀʀ-ask-Gᴅɪʀ.in-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI
(toki kx
na-r-yzkr-ngr=gr noli.)
knife ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-ᴍɪᴅ-peel-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=1ᴀᴜɢII hog.plum.fruit.
‘When we saw the building standing up on the hill, Lrlvz said we should go up there in
order to ask for a knife that we might peel the hog plum fruit with.’ (03.09)
We saw previously in (147) that kx has both its main subordinator function, as well as
another subordinating function meaning, ‘if’ or ‘when’. The latter is also the function of the first
kx in (157), introducing a temporal adverbial clause. Repeating information which has been
introduced previously is part of good narrative discourse in Natqgu. It is not mandatory and it
occurs less in written texts than oral ones, but it has a function similar to that of clause chaining
in other languages by maintaining continuity between sentences.
In fact, this second use of kx still signals subordination, since the clause in parentheses is
subordinate to the following main clause. Therefore, all occurrences of kx are glossed SUBR, no
matter how they are translated. One indicator that it introduces a subordinate clause here is that kx
introduces mclzkr ‘we see’ having no TAM marking, while the main clause, sc tqrpipem, has
three TAM particles, once of which is tq- realis which, as stated before, tracks the story line in
narratives.
Note also that the main clause of (157) indicates indirect reported discourse, in that there
is no kx subordinator following ‘Lrlvz said’. Direct discourse, though, normally has kx at the
quote margin, as previously seen in (146).

60

Depth of relativization possible
Keenan and Comrie (1977) propose an Accessibility Hierarchy which has implications for RCs.
If a specific position on the hierarchy is relativizable, then any position to its left also is. That
hierarchy is repeated here: Subject>direct object>indirect object>oblique>genitive>object of
comparative. Alfarano (2021:562-68) demonstrates with examples that Nalögo, like most
Oceanic languages (Lynch et al 2002:43), allows relativization fairly deeply in the accessibility
hierarchy. I assume this is also true for Natqgu, given the many other parallels, but space does not
allow for extensive corroborative examples.
10.3 Adverbial clauses
In addition to complement and relative clauses of §10.1 and §10.2, the third type of subordinate
clause to discuss is the adverbial clause. Like complement clauses, Natqgu adverbial clauses
occur with both finite predicates with and without TAM markers, as well as non-finite
nominalizations lacking TAM markers.

Temporal clauses
One way of encoding temporal adverbial clauses uses the phrase mz nibr ‘after’ followed by a
nominalization, as in (158).
Më nibö nëmülöpi-könge tötenge sâ tüdwatöpe më rum kâ tüwäbupä-ngöm mgngö
nâbö.
mz nibr nz-mqlrpi-kr=nge
trte=nge
sc=
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
back.part ɴᴍʟᴢ1-be.comforted-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴍɪɴII
father=1ᴍɪɴII
ᴘꜰᴠ=
tq-dwatr=pe=Ø mz rum kc tq-wxbu-px-ngr-mq mqngr ncbr
ʀʟ-enter=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ room ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ ʀʟ-sit-Gᴅɪʀ.out-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither image cross
‘After my being comforted, my father entered the room where the cross image sat.’
(6.12)
Another way to encode temporal clauses is by the juxtaposition of two clauses, one of
which contains a time word, as in (159). The first clause has ‘a short time’ and the second clause
only states ‘and our grandmother died,’ implying that she died after they’d been there a short
time. But the word ‘after’ which could connect them is missing and the clauses are only
connected by ‘and’. English functions similarly.
Mnâtikö badö mëli töboiu ä blökügö Ilëtökalö kâ tübëpe.
mnc-ti=kr
badr mzli
tr-bz=xi-u x
blrkq=gr
be-ᴘʟᴄᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢI ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴘʟ time
ɴᴇɢ-long-ɴᴇɢ
and
grandmother=1ᴀᴜɢII
Ilztrkalr
kc
tq-bz=pe
Ilztrkalr
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-die=ᴄᴏѕ
‘We lived with them a short time and [then] our grandmother Ilztrkalr died.’ (17.06)
A third strategy for encoding temporal adverbial clauses is by use of the subordinator kx
having the sense of ‘when’ followed by finite verb. This strategy was referred to above in the first
clause of (157) ‘when we saw the building standing up on the hill’.

Reason clauses
Reason clauses are encoded in at least two ways: i) with the phrase mz nzmu-krde lcde ‘from its
being like that one’ normally translated ‘therefore’, and ii) with murde ‘because.’
The first way to encode a reason adverbial clause is illustrated by sentences (160) and
(161). In (160) the other guy didn’t want to work in translation. So in (161) lcde refers back to
that statement and the addressee (Mr. Simon) is told that he has to go on to translate alone. This
type of reason clause is introduced by a discourse level construction using the phrase mz nzmu-

61

krde lcde which literally means, ‘from its being like that one’,26 where lcde ‘that one’ refers to a
clause in the preceding sentence.
…Mölä lâ mwä' pä-ngöde nëtekütö-köde Nöpakämölë.
mrlx lc mwx' px-ngr=de
nz-tekqtr-kr=de
Nrpakxmrlz
guy ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ I think refuse-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-exchange-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII Good.News.
‘It seems that this guy doesn't want to translate the Good News.’ (75.10)

Më nëmu-köde lâde, nipem esë'-köm kä natekütöpele Nöpakämölë.
mz nz-mu-kr=de

lc=de

ni=pe-m
ᴘʀᴇᴘ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-be.like-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
ni=pe-m
esz'-krm kx
na-tekqtr=pe=le
nrpa-kx-mrlz
alone ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-exchange=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIA
news-ѕᴜʙʀ-good
‘From its being like that one, it is you alone who must translate the Good News.’ (75.11)
A second way to express reason clauses is in a clause starting with murde ‘because/so
that,’ as in (162), where Mr. Simon describes the forest after a cyclone had hit. It means ‘because’
unless the following verb has irrealis mood, in which case it is a purpose clause meaning ‘in order
that,’ shown in the following example (163) in §10.3.3.
Më nëvëne-kögö peto asa, muöde leplë tüpötë wü më nounâ, tüdwao, tüvëne wü më
nounâ ä tëngölaplä nounâ.
mz nz-vz-ne-kr=gr
peto
asa
murde
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-go-progressive-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=1ᴀᴜɢII
bush
be.slow because
leplz tq-pr-tz=Ø
wq
mz
nounc tq-dwa-o=Ø
people ʀʟ-go-Gᴅɪʀ.up=3ᴍɪɴIS
high
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
tree ʀʟ-jump-Gᴅɪʀ.down=3ᴍɪɴIS
tq-vz-ne=Ø
wq
mz
nounc x
tq-ngrla-plx=Ø
nounc
ʀʟ-go-ɪɴᴛѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
high
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
tree and
ʀʟ-crawl-through=3ᴍɪɴIS tree
‘In our going to the bush it was slow, because a person went up trees, went down,
went up trees and they crawled through trees.’ (12.07)

Purpose clauses
Natqgu purpose clauses are encoded in at least two ways: i) with murde ‘so that’ plus irrealis and
ii) a prepositional phrase following the verb whose purpose it describes.
Öpibële kä nadwatitä mou dü ëbü lâsu sâde, muöde na-ale-kaipëng nëmungö më Dâkta
ä dëbede nede, ä aolvëbë Këpten ngö Veronika.
r-pi-bz=le
kx
na-dwa-ti-tx mou
dq
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴍɪɴIA
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-jump-ᴛʀ-ɪɴᴛѕ again
ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ
zbq
lcsu
sc=de,
murde na-ale-kai-bz=ng
day
ship
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand=3ᴍɪɴII,
so that ɪʀʀ-do-first-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIS
nz-mu-ngr
mz
dckta
x
dzbede
ne=de
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-eat-ɴᴍʟᴢ
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
doctor and
group
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl=3ᴍɪɴII
x
aolvz-bz kzpten ngr Veronika.
and
accept-Pᴅɪʀ.yon captain ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
Veronica.
‘He told him that his ship should anchor another day, so that they might make a feast
for the doctor and his group and the captain of the [ship] Veronica agreed.’ (21.03)
The purpose clause with murde ‘in order that’ plus irrealis, which was mentioned in
10.3.2, is illustrated in (163), where it introduces the purpose for which they want the ship
Veronica to anchor an extra day before taking their guests away.
Nominalization is the other way that purpose clauses are encoded, as in (164). The
Melanesian Brothers go out ‘in their converting other villages,’ encoding their purpose for going.

26 I’m actually not sure whether this means ‘from that thinking there’ or ‘from its being like that there’ because
mu means both ‘think’ and ‘be.like’ and both are equally felicitous in the phrase.

62

Ma nyëdö tësiu kä tupele kâ Bwëng, sâ tëpöpäpeng më në-ëpütö-ködö mëtea këbleng.
ma nyz=dr tzsiu
kx
tu=pe=le kc
Bwzng,
sc=
house ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=3ᴀᴜɢII monk
ѕᴜʙʀ
stand=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIA ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
Bwzng,
ᴘꜰᴠ=
tz-prpx=pe=ngq mz nz-zpqtr-kr=dr
mztea kzble-ngq
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-go.out=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴀᴜɢIS ᴘʀᴇᴘ ɴᴍʟᴢ1-convert s.o.-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴀᴜɢII
village different-ᴘʟ
‘When the brothers' house was completed at Bwzng, they went out to convert other
villages.’ (25.01)

Conditional clauses
Conditional clauses are encoded in one of two ways: i) using nzmu ‘if’ and ii) using the
subordinator kx meaning ‘if’ in context.
The first of these is illustrated by (165), where Mr. Simon discusses the vowel diacritics
in the earlier orthography. Here, nzmu introduces ‘if it was forgotten to spot the heads of the
letters’ and the sentence continues on to give the consequence that the speaking is bad,
presumably when someone tried to read it.
Ä nëmu namöbötitö dötwö nëöläkütiongö naö letë lâdeng, nëyâmnengö kâ tütökape.
x
nzmu na-mrbr-ti-tr
drtwr nz-r-lxkqti-o-ngr
nar
and
if ɪʀʀ.ᴘᴀѕ-lose-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.in
mind ɴᴍʟᴢ1-ᴍɪᴅ-spotted-Gᴅɪʀ.down-ᴀᴘᴘʟ head
letz lc=deng

nz-ycmne-ngr
kc
tq-trka=pe=Ø
letter ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII-ᴘʟ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-speak-ᴀᴘᴘʟ
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ-bad=ᴄᴏѕ=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘And if it was forgotten to spot the heads of the letters, that speaking was bad.’ (79.06)
We’ve seen already that the meaning of the subordinator kx is determined by context. One
of its contexts yields the meaning ‘if’ or ‘since’ and it is less tentative than nzmu. In (166) then,
where the variety to be chosen for Bible translation is discussed, the first clause with kx could
equally felicitously be glossed ‘or if there would be only one language, ‘or since there might be
only one language’ and even ‘or were there to be only one language’.
E kä nangi natü esë'täu, Bënwë täpwë kä mölë.
e
kx
na-ngi natq esz'txu
Bznwz
txpwz kx
mrlz
or
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-be language only.one
Bznwz.vil
only ѕᴜʙʀ
be.good
‘Or if there were to be one single language, only Bznwz [dialect] is good for that.’
(73.14)
Finally, nzmu and kx can combine in sentences where nzmu carries the conditional
meaning and kx subordinates the following proposition, yielding meanings like, ‘if it is (true)
that…’ as illustrated in (167).

Öpile kä nëmu kä tüngi töpnëngö nagö dakänëng, navëbëkö Tëngarare muöde
naokatöpülö nigö më nëmungö.
r-pi=le
kx nzmu kx
tq-ngi trpnzngr
na=gr
ᴍɪᴅ-say=3ᴍɪɴIA
ѕᴜʙʀ
if ѕᴜʙʀ
ʀʟ-be none
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.food=1ᴀᴜɢII
dakxnzng,
na-vz-bz=kr Tzngarare
murde na-okatr-mq=lr
food,
ɪʀʀ-go-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴀᴜɢI
Tangarare
because ɪʀʀ-help-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIA
ni=gr
mz
nz-mu-ngr
be=1ᴀᴜɢII
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-eat-ɴᴍʟᴢ
‘He said that if it was [the case] that we had no food, we should go to Tangarare
[Catholic School] so that they might help us with eating.’ (48.03)

Precautionary clauses
To my knowledge, there is only one way to encode precautionary clauses, and that is through the
use of ‘lest’ murde ma plus realis on the following verb, which encodes that which is to be

63

avoided. This construction was illustrated previously in (86) and (133), with a third example here
in (168).
A' öpimle kä nayatipää kökâng tüpetikö Däi, muöde ma tümibitätö.
a' r-pi-mq=le kx na-ya-ti-px=x
kr-kcng
but
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA ѕᴜʙʀ ɪʀʀ-paddle-ᴛʀ-Gᴅɪʀ.out=1ᴍɪɴI
ʀᴘʀɴ2-ᴅᴇᴍ4-ᴘʟ
tq-pe-ti=kr
Dxi
murde ma= tq-mibi-tx-tr=Ø
ʀʟ-plant-ᴛʀ=1ᴀᴜɢI
Dxi
because lest
ʀʟ-rotten-ɪɴᴛѕ-Gᴅɪʀ.in=3ᴍɪɴIS
‘But she told me I should paddle out to the ones [pineapples] we had planted at Dxi,
lest it [the crop] rot on the vine.’ (69.05)

Concessive clauses
Natqgu forms concessive clauses in two ways. The first is with the phrase kxmule-esz' ‘that it is
like one’ introducing the concessive clause. To increase contrast, the main clause often starts with
the conjunction a' ‘but’ as in (169), but that is not mandatory, as illustrated by (170).
Kämule-esë' nümü ngö skul äplö a' tömwelökru ä dötwögö tövëu, muöde da külu më
skul kä ökatöpü bagö nëabötë-ëvëngö.
kx-mu=le-esz'
nqmq
ngr skul xplr a'
tr-mwelr=kr-u
ѕᴜʙʀ-be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA-one rule
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ
school strong
but
ɴᴇɢ-fear=1ᴀᴜɢI-ɴᴇɢ
x
drtwr=gr
tr-vz-u murde
da
kqlu
mz
skul kx
and
neck=1ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴇɢ-feel.sad-ɴᴇɢ because
thing
many
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
school ѕᴜʙʀ
r-ka-tr-mq=Ø
ba=gr
nz-abrtz-zvz-ngr
ᴍɪᴅ-give-Gᴅɪʀ.in-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIS
ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴀᴜɢII
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-be.happy-always-ɴᴍʟᴢ
‘Even though the rules of the school were strict, yet we were not afraid and we were
not sad~discouraged, because there were many things at the school that gave us
constant happiness.’ (35.08)
Interestingly, two other Santa Cruz languages have constructions glossed identically with
the same concessive meaning. Engdewu exhibits ka ingwe ka öte ‘that it is like one’ (Vaa
2013:420-21) and Nalögo has kä i-ngâ=le öte ‘that it is like one’ (Alfarano 2021:592). Given
this, perhaps ‘that it is like one’ means both propositions are the same, i.e. ‘like one’, so it doesn’t
matter whether A or B. The phrase is fixed and speakers likely process it as a whole without
awareness of its parts.
Example (170) shows Mr. Simon’s translation of Psalm 23:4 set to a traditional quatrain
melody (Boerger 2016:185-89). I include it here for two purposes. First, it illustrates that the
concessive clause can occur before or after the main clause. Second, it also provides evidence that
poetry and song are productive places to find constructions not otherwise attested.
Kämule-esë' vëtöä më nëlo, tömwälöwäu e;
Yawe mnâme bange, kämule-esë' vëtöä më nëlo.
Kx-mu=le-esz'
vz-tr=x
mz
nzlo
tr-mwxlr=x-u

e

ѕᴜʙʀ-be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA-one go-Gᴅɪʀ.in=1ᴍɪɴI ᴘʀᴇᴘ
dark
ɴᴇɢ-fear=1ᴍɪɴI-ɴᴇɢ
vocable
Yawe
mnc-mq=q
ba=nge
kx-mu=le-esz'
vz-tr=x
mz nzlo
Yahweh be-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=2ᴍɪɴI) ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴍɪɴII ѕᴜʙʀ-be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA-one go-Gᴅɪʀ.in=1ᴍɪɴI ᴘʀᴇᴘ dark
‘Even though I walk in the dark, I am not afraid o;
Yahweh you stay with me, even though I walk in the dark.’ (Psalm 23:4)
Another use of the phrase kxmule-esz' means ‘whether or not’, but the ‘or not’ clause is
not overt. See (171), where this sense is implied.

64

Muöde kämule-esë' Dan ä Brenda nëyëlung kalö, a' buk lâng pwä nayâpem bagu.
murde
kx-mule-esz'

Dan
x
Brenda nz-yzlu=ng kalr
because
ѕᴜʙʀ-be.like=3ᴍɪɴIA-one Dan
and
Brenda 3ᴀᴜɢ-return=3ᴀᴜɢIS
later
a' buk
lc-ng
pwx
na-yc=pe-mq
ba=gu
but
book
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
four
ɪʀʀ-stay=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.hither ᴅᴀᴛ=12ᴀᴜɢII
‘Because whether [or not] Dan and Brenda return later, yet these four books would
remain with us.’ (80.10)
10.4 Coordinate clauses
This section looks at coordination between clauses in Natqgu, both through the use of coordinate
conjunctions and through the use of juxtaposition. Coordination between NPs has already been
briefly covered in passing and the specific role of comitatives and depictives was covered in
§4.3.3 and §7.3.8.

Conjunctive coordination ‘and’
Natqgu has a coordinating conjunction x ‘and’ which can conjoin sentences, clauses and NPs as
shown in (172). Let’s look at these four x forms one at a time to illustrate what x can conjoin. At
the beginning of the sentence ‘x₁’ is a discourse-level morpheme, conjoining this sentence to the
previous sentence in the story line.
The remaining three x forms are inside the quoted speech. Of these, x₂ joins two clauses
having the same subject, ‘Your children will become sick and they will die.’
However, the subjects need not be identical as shown by x₃ which conjoins two reason
clauses telling why they will get sick and die. Here murde ‘because’ has scope over both clauses.
The two clauses are ‘because of that bad thing how they treated the demon statues and [because]
it is forbidden for children and lowly people to enter that building.’ Note that ‘the bad thing’ and
‘it is forbidden’ differ in a number of ways and yet they are conjoined. The first ‘because’ clause
focuses on their actions, while the second is in the passive voice discussing a rule.
Finally, x₄ conjoins two NPs, ‘small children’ and ‘lowly men.’ So, together these four x
forms illustrate the various functions of Natqgu x ‘and.’
Ä nëöpibë känëmnëtöng më tötegöng kä, “Doa nemung sa nayagoäng ä nabëng,
muöde da kätömölëu kâ tëwaisö-ngödö müngö döka' kâng ä nëapä-ngöbë badö doa
känëtopwë ä nâblo täne nëdwatö-ködö ma kâ.”
x₁ nz-r-pi-bz kx-nz-mnztr=ng mz
trte=gr-ngq
and
3ᴀᴜɢ-ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
ѕᴜʙʀ3ᴀᴜɢ1-do.sorcery=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
father=1ᴀᴜɢII-ᴘʟ
kx
doa
ne=mu-ngq
sa
na-yagox=ng x₂
na-bz=ng
ѕᴜʙʀ child
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl=2ᴀᴜɢII-ᴘʟ
ɪᴘꜰᴠ
ɪʀʀ-sick=3ᴀᴜɢIS and
ɪʀʀ-die=3ᴀᴜɢIS

murde
da
kx-tr-mrlz-u

kc
tz-wai-sr-ngr=dr
so.that
thing
ѕᴜʙʀ-ɴᴇɢ-be.good-ɴᴇɢ
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-do-thusly-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴀᴜɢII
mqngr
drka' kc-ng

x₃
nz-apx-ngr-bz ba=dr
doa
image
demon ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ-ᴘʟ
and
ᴘᴀѕ-restrict-ᴀᴘᴘʟ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴀᴜɢII
child
kx-nz-topwz x₄ ncblo txne
nz-dwatr-kr=dr ma kc
ѕᴜʙʀ-3ᴀᴜɢ-little and man lowly
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-enter-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴀᴜɢII
house
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
'And the sorcerers said to our fathers, “Your children will get sick and they will die,
because of how badly they treated the demon statues and [because] it is forbidden for
small children and lowly men to enter that building.”’ (04.02)
In fact, Natqgu also conjoins clauses without x ‘and’ as illustrated in (173). The first
clause begins reporting a speech event indirectly with realis marking on ‘ripe’ and the
immediately following word of the second clause continues the indirect quote with irrealis
marking on ‘we should go.’ The idea ‘and’ or even ‘and so’ is implicit between the two clauses.

65

Öpimle bange nâ noli nyëdö sâ tüplâo, naopekö mügö ölilögö.
r-pi-mq=le ba=nge
nc.noli nyz=dr sc=
ᴍɪᴅ-say-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴍɪɴII
tree.hogplum
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ=3ᴀᴜɢII ᴘꜰᴠ=
tq-plc-o=Ø na-o=pe=kr mq=gr r-li-r=gr
ʀʟ-ripe-Gᴅɪʀ.down=3ᴍɪɴIS ɪʀʀ-go=ᴄᴏѕ=1ᴀᴜɢI
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.drink=1ᴀᴜɢII ɢᴇɴ1ʙ-two-ɢᴇɴ1ʙ=1ᴀᴜɢII
‘He told me their hog plum trees [Spondias cythere] were ripe, [so] we should go get
some for the two of us.’ (03.02)

Disjunctive coordination - ‘or’
Natqgu also has a disjunctive particle meaning ‘or.’ Historically the form was e, but it has been
replaced in the past 30 to 50 years by o, a borrowing from Solomon Islands Pijin, which was in
turn borrowed from English ‘or.’ As an older speaker, e ‘or’ is represented in the SGM text. The
uses of ‘or’ do not directly parallel ‘and.’ Instead, it prefers combining NPs, as well as VPs
having the same subject. In the SGM text, there are no examples of e ‘or’ conjoining VPs having
different subjects.
Example (174) illustrates disjunctive VPs with the same subject.
Muöde më yië kang külu töpnëngö nâblo kâng tëetung më makätö kä apütöle e
atubälële nëwëngö lâ.
murde
mz
yiz
kang
kqlu
trpnzngr
ncblo
kcng

because
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
year
these
many
none
man those

tz-etu=ng

mz
makxtr kx
a-pq-tr=le e
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-big=3ᴀᴜɢIS
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
church.building ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴄᴀᴜѕ-hot-Gᴅɪʀ.in=3ᴍɪɴIA or
a-tu-bx-lz=le nz-wz-ngr
lc
ᴄᴀᴜѕ-stand-support-Gᴅɪʀ.up=3ᴍɪɴIA
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-make-ɴᴍʟᴢ
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴅɪѕᴛ
‘Because for many years there was not one of the bigmen of the church who
encouraged or who stood in support of this work.’ (81.02)
However, the constraint above regarding disjunctive clauses with e ‘or’ does not fully
hold in the scripture corpus, but such clauses are relatively rare. Only one, shown in (175), was
found in the 28 chapters of Matthew where the subjects of the two clauses are different.
Sâ tëveapebëng bade kä, “Nim Känëmâpä kâ tëpi kä navëm, o na-aenëli-moukö këdü
nâblo këble?”
sc=
tz-vea=pe-bz=ng

ba=de
kx
nim

Kxnzmcpx
ᴘꜰᴠ
ʀʟ.3ᴀᴜɢ-ask=ᴄᴏѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=3ᴀᴜɢIS ᴅᴀᴛ=3ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
be=2ᴍɪɴII
the.chosen
kc

tz-pi

kx
na-vz-mq=Ø

o
na-aenzli-mou=kr
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
ʀʟ.ᴘᴀѕ-say
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-go-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴀᴜɢIS or
ɪʀʀ-wait-again=1ᴀᴜɢI
kzdq
ncblo
kzble
a
man
different
‘Then they asked him, “Are you the Chosen who they say will come or should we-ex wait
for a different man?”’ (Matthew 11:03)
Kä töpnëngö kâ doa kä mâlä ä kä ayëlumle natünge, sâ tüaotipe dötwönge kä müngö
kämölë dekâ tüyâmnem bange.
kx trpnzngr
kc
doa
kx
mc=x
x
kx
ѕᴜʙʀ none
ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
child
ѕᴜʙʀ
see=1ᴍɪɴI
and
ѕᴜʙʀ
a-yzlu-mq=le
natq=nge
sc=
tq-a-oti=pe
ᴄᴀᴜѕ-return-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA word=1ᴍɪɴII
ᴘꜰᴠ=
ʀʟ-ᴄᴀᴜѕ-take=ᴄᴏѕ
drtwr=nge
kx
mqngr kxmrlz dekc
tq-ycmne-mq
bange
mind=1ᴍɪɴII
ѕᴜʙʀ
spirit good this
ʀʟ-speak-Pᴅɪʀ.hither
ᴅᴀᴛ=1ᴍɪɴII
‘When there was no one who I saw or who answered me, it made me think that it was
a good spirit that’s who was speaking to me.’ (31.16)

66

Compare (174) and (175) to (176) where two VPs are conjoined and the sense is
disjunctive but the word used is x ‘and.’ There were several such constructions in the SGM text.
Taken together, these sentences seems to indicate that there is a tendency in Natqgu to disprefer
clauses with different subjects in disjunctive coordination, but that they are not ungrammatical.

Adversative coordination - ‘but’
Natqgu also has an adversative conjunction a' ‘but’. In the SGM text it only conjoins two clauses
or two sentences, as in (177), but not NPs. There are two a' ‘but’ forms in (177). The first has a
discourse-level function, connecting this sentence to the previous one in the discourse. The
second one connects two clauses where the first clause has a non-verbal predicate.
A' da kä napitäpo, bëkü esë'ne, a' ötangötibë dü doa kä naling nâdö më nëo-köde.”
a' da
kx
na-pi-tx-bz=x bzkq esz'-ne
but
thing
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-say-ɪɴᴛѕ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon=1ᴍɪɴI
do not one-ᴅѕᴛʀ
a' rtangr-ti-bz
dq doa
kx
na-li-ngq
ncdr
but
search-ᴛʀ-Pᴅɪʀ.yon
ɪɴᴅꜰ.ѕɢ child
ѕᴜʙʀ
ɪʀʀ-two-ᴘʟ
ᴄᴏᴍ.ᴅᴜ
mz nz-o-kr=de
ᴘʀᴇᴘ
ɴᴍʟᴢ1-go-ɴᴍʟᴢ.ᴘᴏѕѕ=3ᴍɪɴII
‘But the only thing I would say is, don’t [take] only one, but look for someone else that
there might be two of them together when he goes.’ (27.08)
Adversative semantics can also be signaled by juxtaposed clauses. This is illustrated
twice in (178). In the SGM text, this sentence immediately precedes the one in (176). The
narrator looks around [and/but] sees no one; he calls out [and/but] no one answers. Since when
one looks, one expects to see and when one calls out, one hopes for an answer, it seems that the
most likely understood conjunction is the adversative ‘but’, rather than the conjunctive ‘and’.
Tüobünene mökâ, töpnëngö kä mâlä, ä tüabânene, töpnëngö kë kä ayëlumle natünge.
tq-obq-ne=ne
mr-kc
trpnzngr
kx
mc=x
x

ʀʟ-look-ᴅѕᴛʀ=1ᴍɪɴII
ʟᴏᴄ-ᴅᴇᴍ2.ᴅɪѕᴛ
none
ѕᴜʙʀ
see=1ᴍɪɴI
and

tq-abc-ne=ne
trpnzngr
kz
kx
a-yzlu-mq=le
ʀʟ-call.out-ɪɴᴛѕ=1ᴍɪɴII none
also
ѕᴜʙʀ
ᴄᴀᴜѕ-return-Pᴅɪʀ.hither=3ᴍɪɴIA
natq=nge
word=1ᴍɪɴII
‘I looked around, [but] saw no one, and I called out all around, [but] no one answered
me either.’ (31.15)
Again, looking for further evidence from the book of Matthew, example (179) was found.
Even here, where it might look like ‘but’ is contrasting two NPs ‘Holy Spirit’ and ‘man,’ both of
them have explicit ngi ‘be’ verbs, so here again it is the clauses which contrast.27
doa la tüyö-ngöde ngi-batöpë Müngökätö, a' töngiu nâblo.
doa
la

tq-yr-ngr=de

ngi-batrpz
Mqngrkxtr
child
ᴅᴇᴍ1.ᴘʀᴏx
ʀʟ-pregnant-ᴀᴘᴘʟ=3ᴍɪɴII be-cause
Holy.Spirit

a'
tr-ngi=Ø-u

ncblo
but
ɴᴇɢ-be3ᴍɪɴIS-ɴᴇɢ
man
‘the child she is pregnant with the Holyspirit is the cause, but a man is not.’ (Matthew
1:20)

27 It is possible that the hortatory and expository content of the epistles will reveal other possibilities, but that
investigation is left for the future.

67

11. Discourse genres: Narrative, procedural, and song
I have not analyzed the discourse of all genres of Natqgu, but I’ve done some work in three
genres. Let this section serve as a report on what has been done to date and an invitation to
readers to join in the description of Natqgu by helping fill in the remaining gaps.
11.1 Narrative
My work in discourse has primarily focused first person narratives, like the SGM text, in addition
to a few folk narratives. In my early work, I found that realis aspect tracked the main story line
and backgrounding verbs, which did not move the narrative forward, were normally unmarked for
aspect.
Later, I analyzed a 39-line spoken personal narrative in more detail (Boerger 2019),
looking at a shift in personal directionals at narrative peak. I showed that Natqgu narratives are
comprised of proto-typical parts: setting, inciting incident, developing conflict, climax,
denouement, and conclusion (2019:10). The narrative discussed there included a second, less
complex mini-narrative within its conclusion (2019:12).
I also demonstrated that at the narrative discourse peak several other features co-occurred
with the shift in personal directionals to form a zone of turbulence (Longacre 1985). These were:
direct speech, short clauses with parallel structures, and sentence subjects and objects occurring
in non-canonical positions (Boerger 2019:15).
In Episode 11 of the SGM text, ‘The kite whose string broke’, there are nine third person
minimal referents in the first fifteen lines: man named Metalo, kite, wind, canoe, fish, kite string,
hawk, and two kinds of tree. Rather than using simple demonstratives to refer to them, Mr. Simon
tracks these participants with a complex demonstrative (Table 6) kcma ‘that there.’ Early in this
episode, seven instances of kcma function to reintroduce or emphasize a participant. Its use may
also be a stylized highlighting device for narratives. See (46) for one sentence from this episode.
11.2 Procedural
My work in procedural texts has been less protracted. However, the presence of a passive in
Natqgu came to the forefront when analyzing two procedural texts—one on how to make pudding
and one on how to make canoes. ProtoOceanic (POc) had not previously been analyzed as having
a passive, so I wasn’t expecting one. Then when my study of the procedural texts meant it could
not be ignored any further, I initially assumed Natqgu had innovated it. But later, when
discussing the passive with a colleague, we found that our two widely dispersed Oceanic
languages had cognates for the passives, leading us to propose reconstruction of a passive for
POc (van den Berg & Boerger 2011).
11.3 Traditional Songs
I have also studied and described the Natqgu traditional quatrain song form (Boerger 2015,
2016). One syntactic argument in this sketch was made based on the song form used in example
(176). I agree wholeheartedly with Woodbury (2015) who exhorts that
“verbal art needs to play a more significant role in language documentation because
it promotes grammatical and lexical investigation…and encourages deep inquiry to
the nature and plasticity of speakers’ knowledge of the grammar and lexicon.”
11.4 Implications for fieldwork
This experience of finding grammatically significant and unique features in three genres of
Natqgu brings into focus the need to collect multiple genres, including song forms, during
language and culture documentation activities, since they can exhibit constructions not otherwise
attested (Boerger et al 2016:53-66, 143, 313-321). They need to be collected and subsequently
analyzed—even more so when the languages studied are minority or endangered languages, like
many in Melanesia.
Brenda H. Boerger, brenda_boerger@sil.org

68

12. Appendix A: Abbreviations Used

1

first person
1+2

1st plus 2nd person
2

second person
3

third person
A

transitive agent
ᴀᴄᴄ

accusative base
ᴀᴘᴘʟ

applicative
ᴀѕѕ

associative
ᴀᴛ

attributor
ᴀᴜɢ

augmented
Cᴀᴘᴘʟ

core applicatives
ᴄᴀᴜѕ

causative
ᴄꜰʟ

classifier
ᴄᴏᴍ

comitative
ᴄᴍᴘʟ

completive
ᴄᴏѕ

change of state
ᴅᴀᴛ

dative base
ᴅᴇɪᴄ

deictic
ᴅᴇᴍ

demonstrative
ᴅᴘᴠ

depictive
ᴅᴇʀ

derivational
ᴅѕᴛʀ

distributive
ᴅɪѕᴛ

distal (far)
ᴅᴜ

dual
ɢᴇɴ1ᴀ

genitive
ɢᴇɴ1ʙ

alternate gen form
Gᴅɪʀ.in
geometric directional
Gᴅɪʀ.out
geometric directional
Gᴅɪʀ.up
geometric directional
Gᴅɪʀ.down
geometric directional
I

set 1 enclitic nom prn
II

set 2 enclitic other prn
ɪᴍᴘ

imperative
ɪɴᴅꜰ

indefinite
ɪɴᴛᴊ

interjection
ɪɴᴛѕ

intensifier
ɪᴘꜰᴠ

imperfect(ive)
ɪʀʀ

irrealis
ʟᴏᴄ

locative
ᴍɪᴅ

middle
ᴍɪɴ

minimal
ɴᴇɢ

negation
ɴᴍʟᴢ

nominalizer
O

transitive object
ᴏʀᴅ

ordinal
ᴘᴀѕ

passive
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.feel
feeling classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.hand
handheld classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.betel
betelnut classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.drink
drink classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.food
food classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.rsbl
responsibility classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.ʙ&ɢ
buildings & grounds classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.assoc
associative classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ.fire
hearth & home classifier
ᴘᴄʟꜰ

possessive classifier
Pᴅɪʀ.hither
personal directional
Pᴅɪʀ.yon
personal directional
P

patient, enclitic object
ᴘꜰᴠ

perfective
ᴘʟᴄᴛ

pluractional
ᴘʟ

plural
ᴘᴏѕѕ

possessive
ᴘɴ

proper name
ᴘʀɴ

pronoun base
ᴘʀᴇᴘ

preposition
ᴘʀᴏʜ

prohibitive
ᴘʀᴏᴘ

proprietive
ᴘʀᴏx

proximal
ϙɴᴛ

quantifier, quantity
ʀᴇᴄᴘ

reciprocal
ʀᴇꜰʟ

reflexive
ʀʟ

realis
ʀᴘʀɴ

relative pronoun base
S

intransitive subject
ѕɢ

singular
ѕᴜʙʀ

subordinator
ѕᴘᴇᴄ

specific, specifier
ѕᴛʀ

semitransitive
ᴛᴘɴʏᴍ

toponymic
ᴛʀ

transitivizer
V

verb
