Excerpts from the Introduction to ~
Grammar
Bruce Rigsby
University of Queensland
The following are sections from the introductory chapter of my
Gitksan Grammar, which has now been submitted to the B.C. Provincial
~
I thought they might touch on matters of interest to other
Northwest SCholars, and so I've reformatted them singlespaced for
presentation here.
Diane Barwick, Pier De Paola, John Dunn, Dell Hymes, Michael
Krauss, Peter HUhlh!lusler, Jay Powell and Rosalind Whalley read a draft
of the introductory chapter and made thoughtful comments, corrections,
and suggestions, many of which I have incorporated and made.
Research funding has come at various times from the National Museum
of Canada, the University of New Mexico, Harvard University, the 'Ksan
Association, the Center for Applied Linguistics, the University of
Queensland, and the British Columbia Provincial Museum.
I alone am responsible for the views I express and the materials
present in this work.
I would appreciate comments, suggestions,
corrections, etc. from readers, and I'm open to discussion on any points
by correspondence.
~ Gitksan !!. Language 2!.!!. Dialect?
The present monograph provides a grammatical description of the
Gitksall language, and we now turn to the problem of defining just what
we mean by the phrase "the Gitksan language".
This leads us also to
consider the relationships between the terms "language" and "dialect",
because Gitksan has been referred to in the anthropological and
linguistic literature as a dialect of the Nass-Gitksan language (Rigsby
1967, 1970, 1975).
For an even longer period of time, Gitksan has also
been referred to as a dialect of the Tsimshian lan7uage (Boas 188~,
1911b; Garfield 1939:173, 195-6; Duff 1964a:15; Guedon 1977).
I reopen
the question here.
There are four sorts of approaches that linguists and
anthropologists have followed in defining the concepts of language and
dialect.
First, there is an older practice of referring to separate
language varieties that share a common genetic origin as dialects
(Haugen 1966:923).
Thus someone might refer to English, German and
Swedish as Germanic dialects, or of French, Spanish and Italian as
Romance dialects.
It is in this sense of shared historical origin that
Boas usually referred to the Tsimshian and Nisgha languages as dialects
of Tsimshian.
Second, American linguists have generally conceptualized the
relationship between language and dialect in terms of mutual
intelliGibility.
Accordingly, dialects are varieties of a language that
are either mutually intelligible or are connected by mutually
intelligible varieties (llockett 1951:1:321-330;
Gleason 1961:441-442).
It was this sort of definition that I had in mind when I wrote (Rigsby
269 J
1970:212):
•.. Nass-Gitksan and its closely related congener, Coast TSimshian,
comprise the Tsimshian language family.
Nass-Gitksan, as a
language name, subsumes the dialects which are spoken today in a
number of villages located in the Nass and Skeens River va lleys.
These dialects appear to fall into two major sub-groupings;
the
Nass dialects of the Nass valley and the Gitksan dialects of the
Skeena Valley.
By this logic, I should present a full grammatical description of the
Nass-Gitksan language in all its dialectal diversity, or else I should
restrict myself and present a grammar of the Gitksan dialect(s) of the
Nass-Citksan language. A decade ago, I would have accepted this
phrasing of the choice.
Today, I cannot accept it because there are
theoretical, methodological and practical considerations that lead me to
accept and use the people's own phrssing in English that speaks of the
Gitksan language, not of the Gitksan dialect.
The theoretical objection to the mutual intelligibility approach is
that it assumes the intelligibility of two language varieties is
primarily a function of their structural similarity. The closer two
language varieties are in phonology, grammar and vocabulary, the more
they are intelligible to each other.
Some lexicostatistical studies
make the same assumption and distinguish separate languages from
dialects of the same language in terms of an arbitrary percentage of
shared basic vocabulary, generally about 70%.
Yet the literature on
attempts to operationalize and measure intelligibility show the
difficulties of distinguishing intelligibility due to structural
similarity from that due to normal language learning. It is important
to keep in mind that language varieties are intelligible to people, to
speakers of language varieties; language varieties or codes are not
intelligible to each other.
And too as Wolff (1959, 1967) pointed out,
matters of social and cultural evaluation may lead speakers to deny that
one or another language variety is intelligible to them.
It seems to me
that the interesting and important matter of intelligibility should be
kept separate from the question of whether language varieties should be
considered to be dialects of the same language or not.
(See kigsby and
Sutton 19~O-l:!2:l7-18 for a critical overview of the literature of
intelligibility).
Third, the relationship of dialect to language may be cast in terms
of speech functions as in everyday English-speaking and European usage
(see lIaugen IYo6:924-<J25).
Thus, a language has a full set of
functions, including official use in public settings and education,
writte .. literature, and codified norms as set down in a standard
orthography, grammars and dictionaries.
In this way, modern Standard
Ellgl ish, French and Gern.1n qualify as languages. Dialects, for their
part, are generally unwritten and are functionally restricted to
dOlllest ic and community or regiona 1 settings.
Cockney (in Eng !ish) and
the various Low German varieties of north coastal Germany count only as
dialects, not as full languages.
Phrased another way, such functional
definitions basically ask whether a language variety is a Standard
language or not.
lly this criterion, neither Gitksan nor Nisgha can be
considered to be full languages, although both are in the early
inc i pient stages of standard language development.
Fina 11 y, these
functional definitions often include an implicit negative, denigrating
2
270

l:
nt, in th;]l it lannUll.;t: i~ considcr~d lo be hetter thou a diu1ect.
It is not surprl"lnc the Gitksan people insist un calUng their language
II 'an);uage .Ind not a d iul ec t, as lin,:U I sta sometimes te 11 them they
shoulJ.
This brin::s us fin" I I y to the founh appCt>ach to the question of
lanl:u .. ge and dialect. It is one that is implicit in moch modern
:rociolln;:uistic and lingUistic Rnthropological work, where till'
relationship(s) holding between social groups and the langua!:e varieties
they slICak is rel:arded as an e •• pirlcal 'Iuestion, open to variabi I ity and
requiring research (see specifically lIymes 1968; Rigsby and Sutton 19110-
tl2: Ho"",ine 19t11).
~'or exanll,le, speaker .. of local language vllricti"s on
the two sides of the boundary between The Nether lands and the Gennan
Federal I:epubllc can understand and converse wilh one another, yet the
p<!ople on The Netherlands side say that they speak Dutch, while those on
the Gern."n side soy that they speak Ger .... n (Houlton 1 '.It1'): 404).
/I
sociol1nguist, such as Trudgill (1974:15-1&), would soy that the local
varieti"s or dia lects are heterononlOus with respect to Standard Ilutch or
Standard German, as the case may be, but that the two national Standard
languages lire autonomous with respect to ellch other.
'nlUS, the citizens
and residents of TI.e Netherlands national state consider the Dutch
langus!:e to include local non-standard llutch (but not Frisian) dialects
along with Standard Dutch. Their views regarding the inclusion of
Flenlish and Afrikaans language varieties are more problematic.
Germans
similarly consider the G"rman language to include non-atandard and
Standard German varieties.
Brief} y put, this fourth approach places great value upon community
norms relating to speech forms and their rules of use and upon conununity
'perceptions and definitions of language varieties, their
intelli!:ibility, and so on.
In this reapect, it may be said to
em"ha"lze "emic" phenomena, often non-linguistic, yet it also requires
close attention to the hard "etic" facts of variability of speech forms
within a conlBunity.
Indeed, the very question of whether the socis 1
group under study is a c .... unity or not is an emllirical one to be
investigat"d, lind this requires methods of ethnographiC, sociolingUistic
and sociological research that go beyond traditlo~,l dialectology and
1 in!!uist-I nformant el iciting sessions.
And unfortunate 1 y, lI1e"e methods
require more time, funding and research assistance than have been
available to lIIe over the period of .. y Gitksan (and Nisr.ha and Coast
Tsimshian) research, yet I believe I have managed to gain some reliable
knowledge about the Gitksan co .. nunity and their norms relatin~ to
language and speech.
Bloomfield (1927) offers a perceptive view of such
norms among lhe tienomini, and V. lIymes (1975) presents the instructive
case of Warm Springs Sahaptin, which is directly parallel to the Gitksan
situation in many ways.
To ant icillate, there is indeed R brooder Gitks8n cOllwunity that
includes the local village communities listed earller. It can be
defined ctically by such sociological criteria as marri.oge I,nlterns
(Kasakoff 1~70, 1974, 1976) and psrticipation in a common system of
cerenlOnial ellchan):e (AddIOS 1<)69, 1973, 1'.174).
And e!llically it is
defined by the people's own belief and public statements in Enllliah that
they are Gi tksan and speak thei r own 10nguol:e:
they are not N I sgha
(Nl~ll.n'a or Glt.!.emsim, or simply, T.!.L'ftIsim) nor are they Tsilnshian
(1's imsan), who each have their own distinct i ve nali ve lanGuage.
:3
1I0wever, the Gltksan people have no conventional indil\~.~os name
for their own language that sets it apart from Misgha and Tsimshian.
They generally refer to their own language as Sim'alg8x the real or true
language, but the Nisgha and Tsimshian people do the same-t~rhere is
a terlll, Gitx<lanimx (or similar form) that indeed means the Gitksan
language specifically, as opposed to Nisll.8'am.!. the Nbsha lanJ\uage and
Ts'imsonion.!. the Tsilllshian language, but these locutions are not in
conunon use the way that Sin,'algax is, althuugh their construction-type
is al'l,arently old.
Another term-;- Arnst, also names the lanlluage or
perh"IIs (mure narrowly) its more formal variety used on public
occasions.
AmHt is thoullht to be an old name, and fewer people know it
than know the nanle Sim'alnax.
I don't know whether the Nisghas alld
'I'simshialls u"' .. Alllsl (or COIl""te forllls).
A few older I:itksall people call
their 1anlluage Gaanilnx, but that term also includes Nisgha. It is a
Tsionshian word that oneans the up"treanl !!!. interior languare: it is a
loanword from the Coast Tsimshian language and not an originally Gitksan
word.
Illth respect to lan;;uage change, the existence of separate GitksRn,
Nisghll and Tsimshian communities is Significant, for these are the more
or les" bounded social units within which there are distinctive nornls
and standards relating to language and speech.
Linguistic continuity
and change, divergence and convergence, are functions primarily of
intra-community culture and social interaction. It is In the Gitksan
conununlty that particular speech forms have definite indexical values
and functions.
Phrased differently, it is within the Gitksan conununity
thst old "I.eech fornls are maintained or lost and new ones are accepted
or rejected.
However, the Gitksan community is a bilingual conununlty
now, usinl: English (one of the two official national languages of
Canada) and Gitksan, so that it 1s not possible to understand the
present currents and processes of change in the I:itkson language without
reference to English and the broader I=!uropean-Canadian society.
From n SOCiolinguistic perspective, the Gitksan community is in a
transitional situation as people usc English more "nd more in their
social lives to the ellclusion of Gitksan, which has come to he
restricted "'''Inly to the hODle or domestic scene and to use IIJonaside
~nglish at public occasions, sach as feasts, official ceremonies, and
churCh services.
'l1.e functional dominance of Enf:llsh has been
established over the past century as Gitksan people have come to
porticil>ate more fully in nlainstrcam Canadian econOinic and social life
where the knowledg" and use of ~nglish are necessary and where native
lanuanlles hnve been sti;:matir.ed as primitive anll not suited to modern
life.
As well, there was n government policy (Levine and Cooper 197<)}
that suppressed (or at least discouraged) indir,enous languages throlll~h
the residential school system and excluded them from the classroom and
I.luyground unt il ju~t a few years ago.
.'Iany Gitksan (lnrents nWlle "
deliberate choice not to speak Gitksan to their children, but to use
only En!;llsh with the,n, so that they would grow up competent in Eng' ish
and uvoid the shame and embarrassment that their parenta had experienced
from teachers and other Whites.
The functional expansion of English in the Gitksan col ... ,unHy hilS
4
• 2. 72.

\
be':.~ccal"pallicJ by the devclol.lllellt at differences in Gitksun langua!:e
coulpctence and fluency across thc gent:ratiolls to the point ~here one can
say that l:n;:lislo Ioas bec(JIIJe the vermicular for the great IIUlJ0rity oC
GHksan peuI.le.
110ere are no UIOnolingual sl,eakers of Gitksan any
IOllger, all.! 110 children are growin!: u/' with Gilksull as their oilly
lalll:u"l:e.
Older people (aver sixty) are generally fully cOIIpetent and
fl",,"l ill :":itksall.
;-lany oC them ulso IlIIve 1:0001 "nll11sh, although
perhaps with ilIl accent, while others sl,eak English interlangulI!;c
vuri"l i"s thal di"l.l"y mallY trllll"fcrs frou. Citks"n.
l-iiddle-agc.1 I.eople
an. v"riably conlpetent and fluent in Citksan, and they have excellent
);1I!iIi:;h.
1I0,l[ (but not all) of theu. are sun.ly I-:nglish dOl"inant, i.e.,
they use .. uch Ulore );nglish than Citksan, and );nglish appears to be the
... nllll,,:;e of their I.ersonal iJentlly, of their inn"r I'rivate live .. lind
thoughts.
Younger adults (over twenty) are definitely English-do .. inant,
and U ... re I'roba"ly are more selol-speaker .. (in the sense of llurian 1977,
1!.llH, 19H1) of Gltksan among the .. than there are fully competent, fluent
speilkcr...
'fcellallen.; alld childrl!ll are virtually all t:lIglish wOllolinllualH
by u"ag", althouKh there are sowe fluent Citksan speakers among the'D,
lind IlIOIIY uC th .. w woulJ have a passive (bearing, bUL 1I0t "p .. akillg;
comprehending, but not using) knowledge of the language gained from
gralldl'ar""ts alld older relaLives.
'I'h" iUl .. r,;eueraLional cOlltinuity of transonission of Citk .. ,," to
chilJren has definitely been broken.
Children in ICispiox villa!:e
entered pcin.ary sch/.oi.in the .. arly 1\140's as Gitksall ID()I\oHnguals
knowing lilll .. , if any English (p.c. frOID Nru. Anne Hichuel (ne"
tklJilllles), the first (illksan person to beco"", a 'Iuali1'1ed teacher, who
taught there then).
As widJl,,-aged adults these people are all Mglish-
dOluillallL IIOW, and mallY of them have beco ..... s"~'i-lilleuk .. ru of Gitksiln alld
even passiv .. bilinguals.
6y l\16b, when .. y falllily and I Ilpellt the su_r
ill Kisl,iox, r:lIulish hlld beco",e the lanGuar,e of children' s
Jl1i1YI~roul'",
illlIl only a few siblin,~-sets of children Ilpoke Gitksan oUlOng themselves,
,,}UII;: with 1-:n,;lislo.
1'"01,1,, say that ollly in the I,ast ten years hllll
Ellglish beconoe the language of children's Illlly-groul's in ICitwancool alld
K1tsclluecla villdge", where easy road acceus has be .. n mor .. recellt.
A .. i;lIglish has gained lIIore native speaker .. in succeeding
1:t:lIeratiolls, there also has develop"d 1\ non-stalldarll variety of Gitksall
ElIl!lish that Ims conventionalized a number of constructions and usall""
thai are trallHf..,rs froul Git-k:sall 1all;;uage structure.
These illc lu.le the
tru" .. itive verb.!!.!!£. in the sens" of ~, a constructio" of fu or delll
Pl!r~(mlll I,allll.! which corrc::il'out.iu to the non-stundard EllUl i.sh asn()ciutiy~
and l!!2 c.;n;;truction (e.g., fu I'red or .!l.!!!! Fred corresllOnds to l::!:.!cl
aJUI th<:.II; dill is a1\ indiflellous G Jlluralizer, while deno is frum English
.!:!.!£!!!.), and a Ilredicative possessiv" cUII .. truction with head ~
(as in
'l'h;'ll's Barr's .2.::!.!.-, rather than That's !·iary·s.).
Tlu,?s~ features acc
also found in Nisghu and Tsimshian English (}\uld .. r 1900; Tarpent 19H1b;
the"e twu papers wel-" rel.rillted and I.ublished ill ?1).
Th" Ilresellt situatioll of th" Gitksan language ,"ust be juJgeJ ;os
perilous, and its chauc~s for lonu terlll survival ar" nol goo,. lu:caus(! it
does 1I0t have a self-r"producing s!,eech community whose ,"embers liS" it
p .. illlarily fo,- iuentity-colIstrllction anti maintenance and for Lloe 11111
ranKe of social functions.
People do accord Gitk>lall a high measure of
vulue i1:; a "illi,,"l .. Ylllhol 01 their <li .. tillctive "ocial ideliLity "lid
culLural loerita!:e, "ut their iJeolollY is 1I0t supported co .. pletdy by
thEd r l'raclic,", - Lhey lauellL Lhe loss of tloe lallI:UIII:C, yet ';0 011
apeakinll (1I81nly) English to their children and amollg thOlos<.--...(:
The
moves to teach Gitksan in school over the past decade indicate that some
people ar" aWllre of th .. iIolpending de .. be of the 1anllll8l1" alld that th .. y
recognize the importance of schooling for cultural trana.ission in
IIIOd"rll life. It 1& true that bringing Gitksan into the school clln hclp
to rai .. e its status, but it is unUkely that the school can be a lIOn.
effective iliSlitulioli for trllnsllitt1I1K the language to lIew g,,"en.tio"s
of children than are the home alld local coaAUnlty.
.lichad "rau.", (II.C.), th" IIi rector of the Alaska /lotiv .. l.all"u,,:;e
Cellter, sUlll:euts that there are thrau levels of langua!!e Jlr"""rvation
which Indiall l.eol.1 .. , lill;;uists, alld biUIICual educators lIighL se .. k to
achiev" in .. uch Clille .. ,UI that of Gitksan.
The first is silll.ly Lo
d(,culIICllt th.· lallt:ua~e as nde(luately as possible. This would illclude th"
preparation oC a comprehenllive gr_r, dictionary, and collection uC
text!! (illcludilll! tradiLional oral litoruture), both writtell alld
toperecorded.
The ~cond level of language preservation involves the
act iv" cultivation of th" lanc:ual:e in II restrict .. d nUIDber of soci.}l
dOlllUillS, such as at ceremonies, church, and school. 11lis requires a
knowledl,l"ab1e clas .. of native lan,;ua~e speCialists who can carry Oil the
teachine of the language in forllal and inforll8l setting::!, while the
luajority of th .. cOl:llllunity lllUy have more Hili ted cooape,tence alld fluency
in the language.
The third level of language preservation is that found
in Uvinl; lallguages, where cu"versational ability in the vernacular is
transmitted ill the fun, and the local c_nity. Gltksall parents and
leaderll lIijJht cOllsider whether the .... intenance and preservation of
Gitksan as a living lansuase ia a realistic goal. Certainly the
pre""I'Valioll of Gitksall at the first two levels i .. possible, and illdeed
it is underway.
As lCrauss points out, the successful revival of lIebrew
.. s .. livilll: lalll:lla~:" in the """'ern stote of larael was aided "y it>l
preservation over the centuries at the first alld aecond levels, which
kept iL frOlU total "xtinction.
Thvrc would Ill! UruHL
tra:~eJy in the "~lIth of thu f.:itl;gan lan~u:.gc,
but I t.eHeve that tloe misfortune of illdigenous language loss would 1I0L
be ill th" disIlPl",ar.lJlce of a Jistillctive Citksan social idcntity (aL
least 1I0t in the short term over a few generatiolls).
'l'here i .. a
sillll.le .. 1I1deJ •• ,ill .. tr"am view, sUPl,orted by s""'" weaklllilld"d eJucators and
acndeulics and held even by SOJ1\8 uncritical native I,eople, that OIl<!
CLlIII."t be a r"al Indian unl .... s one can speak an Indilln IIIn!;"'I,:e.
Th"
weaknells of this pO>lition is that it cOllfuse>l eXLernal traits, suclo ....
"I."ech, dr""" and nl'l",arallce, with the illller valu"" lind I.rillci/.}"" Lhat
t:uide people's liv"s anJ ouake up the nonl substallce of their social anJ
per"ulla1 l(hmtiLy. It s .. ellls evid,,"L that Gitksan people hllve takell
MUlish over Cur Lheir own language, as seen in Gitksan .:"lIlish, and
Lhey US" it tor identity-culistruction and id"ntitY-tai.JinLenallce "lid oLher
social l'UfJIUSCS.
llowev"r, they don't sileak their own GitkSiln I:"t:li"h
acouucl Whitt.":ti, (or lh~y huvc bu&.!u tot) often corrc..:tctl nnd 5h.)lOOd for not
"peakillg Millish pruperly, i.e., for speaking t:nglish that strays frOlll
local UlUiJlstr"""1 nurms.
The puttenl of usinC "good" ElIl:l1>;h with 1;llih',;
ha", the unfortunate effect of reinforcing White susJliCiolls that HI1\IIY
Gitl,salls, eSl,ecially thuse of :lI'Jlar"nt abed descellt, or" 1I0t reully allot
truly Illdilln.
The tru,;l!dy of Llu.! dhiill)jiCaCiluc(: of the Citksan liSn;:uiluc,
ju:;tc~d.
would I.e ill the lOllS of cultural herital:e, because auch trudit iOlla1
Gitksa1\ kllowledg" of th.dr houoelunoJ, CUstOblS and hi .. tory has 1I0t b • .!ell

translated into English, and indeed it would suffer reduction and
simplificstion by unreflective translation. The Whites like to believe
that they occupied a wilderneas a century or so ago, which they are
transfor-ing and developing. They also presume to give their own namea
to the land, but the chiefs and elders who speak Gitksan know well that
their homeland is a hu.anized landscape that has a myriad of place names
and associated legends and historical narratives.
As well, there is a
rich folk knowledge of ani.al and plant species and of their origina and
usea, not to mention the high culture of the chiefs and Indian doctora.
Unfortunately. Gitksan children today are learning only a a.all fraction
of their heritage because they mainly hsve access only to what they hear
in English.
For the descriptive linguist, the present situation of inter-
generational differences in competence and command of the Gitksan
language presents problems for they add to the range of variability that
a grammar should account for in its coverage. Pacific Northwest
linguists have generally ignored such problems, and this is
understandable in the caae of extinguishing languages where the
infor.ation provided by a single apeaker or small number of speakers who
are willing and amenable to working with a linguist becomes even more
precious. In my Gitksan fieldwork, I have worked mainly with a s.all
number of older and middle-aged people who are regarded as good
speakers, and I've tried to crosscheck material wherever possible. It's
also been helpful to present my analysis and understanding of various
features of the language to several Gitksan language workshop groups,
for they have corrected me and deepened my knowledge.
The example
sentences used in this grammar have all been checked by one or more
older speakera [Some of the checking remains to be done). Hany examplea
come from my own observations and from texta, but most come from direct
elicitation. Wherever possible, I try to describe and discuss
variability - its sources are .any and varied - for it is the stuff from
which language change is faahioned, but for the most part, my
description is based upon the eastern Gitksan language varieties apoken
in Iispiox and Hazelton.
The Taimshian Language Family
To judge from historical and oral accounta, the Gitksan, Nisgha and
Tsimshian peoples seem always to have recognized that their respective
languages are similar and are related in the sense of sharing common
ancestry. although they differ in their accounts of which language has
remained closest to ita original or "pure" form.
The first competent
linguist to recognize the genetic relationship of the languages was
Franz Boas. who began hia work on them with two Coast Tsimshian apeakers
in Victoria in 1886.
Boas (1888:231. translated by C.N. O'Grady) wrote
not long after that " ••• The Tsimshian is spoken in two dialects, of
which the Nisgha is seen to be the oldest ••• The following tribal
groupings are distinguished among the Taimshian.
• •• the first two
[Hisgha and Gitksan) speak Nisgha. the remainder speak Tsimshian".
Boas
here used the term "dialects" in the same sense that nineteenth century
philologists might have spoken of English and German as "Germanic
dialects".
The well-known classification of Uajor J. W. Powell (1891: 139-141)
7
2.?5
and hia associates included the Chimmesyan [Tsimshian) family~~ one of
its 58 families of North American Indian languages. The Powell
classification of the Tsimshian languages was based upon Boas (18H9).
which repeated Boas' (1888) treatment.
Boas also spent a month in 1894 at Kincolith near the mouth of the
Nass River. where he worked on Nisgha and Tsetsaut Athabaskan (see
Rohner 1969:155-173 for materials on his stay). His Nisgha texts from
the trip were published aa Boas (1902).
As a result of field research
and desk analysis. Boas became well aware of the similarities and
differences between the Nisgha and Coast Tsimshian languages. for his
'l'simshian grammar (henceforth. TG) in the first volume of the Handbook
of ~
American Indian Languages, included parallel sketches of the
two varieties. In the opening paragraphs of TG, he located where "the
Tsimshian" was spoken and he referred to Taimshian, Nisgha, and Gitksan
as its "three prinCipal dialects" (TG:287).
Boas apparently did no work
on the Gitksan language although he may have met some Gitksan people and
he would certainly have heard the Nisghas and Tsimshians talking about
the Gitksan people, their customs and their language.
It was George Dorsey, also an anthropologist, who in 1897 first
accurately described the relations among the three languages. Gitksan,
IUsgha, and Tsimshian. as they may be observed today.
Dorsey (1897:277)
wrote:
Boaz [sic, referring probably to Boas (1889») has divided the
Tsimshian stock into dialects. those speaking the Nasqa and those
speaking the Tsimshian proper... It is to be noted furthermore
that the tribes apeaking Nasqa are not confined to the territory of
the Nass River, but are also found on the Skeena River.
As to the
distinguiahing characteristics of the two dialects I had no time
for investigation. But from various sources I learned that those
tribes which spoke the Tsimshian dialect proper could not
understand the Nasqa dialect, whereas the Nasqa tribes could
understand those who spoke Tsimshian proper. It appears yet
further that there are two closely related groups of the Nasqa
dialect, the Naaqa and the Kitksan, the former group being confined
to the Nasa River, the latter to the Skeena river.
In Rigsby (1967), I quoted Dorsey with approval and I summarized
the results of my field inquiries. Gitksan and Nisgha people alike say
that they can understand one another readily upon first contact or
hearing of the other language. although there may be some unfamiliar
words.
Gitksan and Nisgha people do not readily understand the Coast
Tsimshian language upon hearing it for the first time. Niddle-aged
Gitksan people in the late 1960's told me that they could only
understand "about half" of what the Tsimahian say in their own language,
but they also commented that it was easy for them to learn Coast
Tslmshian.
Ful1 comprehension eVidently requires second-language
learning, but the task 1a not difficult because the two languages arc
closely related and structurally similar.
Dunn (1976a:6) says that"
Coast Tsimshion people consider that Nass River speech is less
unintel1igible to them than is Gitksan.
At the same time they feel that
Nass and Gitksan belong to the same language and that both are different
from their own native tongue".
From even before contact with P.uropeans. the Gitksan people had
8
~76

opportunit'i.es/ to learn a second language and to become bilingual.
People used to travel to the coast and to the lower Nass Rivl!r area in
the early spring for oolachen (candlefish), where they IRet Nisgha and
Tsiloshian people and traded, attended their ceremonies, and intermarried
with them.
Gitksnn people considered it to be presti;Jeful to Imow and
to be able to speak the Coast Tsimshian language properly. Gitksan
chiefs often used the Coast Tsimshian language in public speeches and
ceremonies, and many ceremonial songs were in it. From about 1900, many
Gitks~n people had the chance to hear and learn Coast Tsimshian during
residence on the coast while working on fishing boats and in the salmon
canneries.
In a later unpublished paper (Iligsby 1~69), IISome Linguistic
Insights into Recent Tsimshian Prehistory II , I treated some of the
phonological (viz. the dorsal consonantislos) and lexical dimensions of
the historical relationship between Gitksan and Nisgl~ and of them with
the Coast Tsimshian language. Some features of the Gitksan/tlisgha
relationship are repeated here in the chapter on phonology and
elsewhere.
To repeat the major conclusions of that paper (see also
I(igsby and Dunn 1968f, as well as Shener and Bauman 1972: 142-143), I
presented evidence which showed that all three languages of the
Tsimshian family had borrowed words from other neighbouring languages
and that the ancestral hOlue of the proto-language was situated on the
coast and not in the interior area, as Boas (1916:872) had earlier
sUSl;ested.
Since then, John Dunn (1976a, 1976b) has reported that there is a
second coastal Tsimshian language that is still spoken by several
families in Klemtu and /Iartley Bay.
lie calls the language IISouthern
Tsimshianll ; its native name is (SStHIxs) at Hartley Bay and (sglHllllX) at
Netlakatla, Alaska. Southern TsiDishian appears to be as distant from
Coast TsiDlshian along several dimensions as it is frOID Gitksan and
Nisgha, and it is phonologically conservative in SOlDe ways interesting
for the reconstruction of Proto-Tsimshian. The existence of Southern
'l'simshian supports my earlier hypothesis that Proto-'fsimshian was spoken
on the coast south of the Skeena, because its location accords with
Sapir's (1916) principle that the area of greatest diversity is the area
of longest occupation.
Host recently, Marie-Lucie Tarpent (1900, 1983b) has expanded our
knowledge of the structural development of the Tsimshian languages by
apply-in3 the method of internal reconstruction to Misgha plural
formations. Plurality is a highly developed grammatical category in
Gitksan, Nisgha, and Coast Tsimshian nOlilinal and verbal morphology, and
synchronically, each of the three languages displays a bewildering range
of plurul construction-types, ranging from silople initial C1Q-
reduplicated forms through more opaque, often doubly marked (i.e.
"I'leonastic") reduplications, to suppletive sets. Tarpent provides
reasonable analyses of the histories of the several construction types
in Nisgha and importantly, she discerns three stages in the development
of plural-marking in Nisgha. The details of the historical development
of plural constructions in Gitksan and Coast Tsimshian differ frOiD
Nisgha, but Tarpent's results seem ·generalizable in broad outline to
thelQ.
Tarpent (1983a) exumines the Ilisuhn numerals and
reconstructs some of their possible derivations.
9
217
J~
Despite the great amount of descriptive linguistic work t~s
been done in Gitksan, Nisgha and Coast Tsiashian since 1~66, the three
langual:es remain inadequately and incompletely reported in the
literature. Boas TC remains the major publication, and although it -sy
be superseded in the future, it will remain a claasic monument.
One
hopes that as new descriptive grallllll8rs (such as Dunn 1979 and this
present one) of the four languages are written and published, we can
turn more of our attention and energy towards unraveling the historical
developmunt of tho Tsimsh1an language family and reconstructing its
proto-language.
To conclude this section, the presently known classification of the
four languages of the Tsiashian fa.1ly may be repreaented thus:
Coaat
Tsimshian
Tsimshian Language Family
Southern
Tsimshian
Nisgha
Gitksan
(including
Kitwancool)
Ill! llli!!!:. Relationships 2!!l.!!!. Tsimshian Language Family
Although Boas (1911a:46) spoke of the languages of the Pacific
Northwest as forming a distinctive language area (what we would now call
a Sprachbund) and included Tsimsh1an among them, Edward Sapir was the
first scholar to focus and comment IIOre fully upon the areal historical
relationships of the Tsimshian languages to neighbouring languages and
language families. Sapir (19l6:458; see also Golla 1984:108 for Sapir's
earlier conuoents on the same topic in an unpubliahed 1913 letter to A.
L. Kroeber) noted that Tsiashian, Kwakiutl-Nootka, Chemakum and Salishan
all share the features of numeral classifiers and distributive (or
plural) reduplication. Sapir also observed that the Tsiaahian-speaking
people were culturally more similar to the Haida and Tlingit (aee also
Sapir 1920:269-270, 1921d) than to their southern neighbours and he
(191b:459) said:
'
••• the morphological resemblances between Tsimshian and the
languages south of it, when contrasted with the lack of
correspondingly significant resemblancea between Tsimshian and Ha-
dene [Athabaskan. lIaido, and Tlingit), seema to be indicative of a
much earlier contact of the Tsimshian with the Kwakiutl and the
Salish than with the llaida and Tlingit.
It was also Sapir who first proposed that the Tsimahian language
family was genetically related to the Penutian language stock, whose
other member lal\guage~ are found far to the south, mainly in the present
states of Oregon and California. In December, 1915, Sapir wrote to
Kroeber with his thoughts on expanding the Penutian groupinc to include
10
.- .... ,,,. .......... _-,., .......•.. ., ...... -._ ................... ~ .... .
278

a number 0 .. "regon languages (Takelma; Coos, Siuslow, and Alsea; and
Chinookan) and the Tsimshianic languages:
And now (don't fointl), I think that Tsimshian is the most
northern outlying member of the stock.
Again greatly special .. zed,
but still exhibiting mony startling featurea in common...
Of
Chinook and Tsimshian I am not as sure as of Lower Umpqua
[Siuslav), Coos, and Takelma, but I think my evidence will grow as
I work on it. How to group these languages I do not yet know, of
course...
I doubt if Takelma, \~. Oregon, Chinook, and Tsimshian
form a northern unit as contrasted with your southern [Californian)
one.
(from Golla 1984:201-202).
3y 1918, Sapir was sufficiently confident to write to Robert Lowie:
Just at the moment I am carding some of my Penutian - Takelma -
Coos - Siuslaw - Chinookan - Tsimahian correspondences. It is
technical work, of course, but quite interesting, as many lines of
historical research are opened up.
Yes,!!!I...l!2.t, Tsimshian. li2!.!!.
bit isolated. Very specialized in development, but showing clear
threads, in my humble and heterodox opinion, binding it to
Oregonian "stocks".
I have recently prepared a paper on Nass River
terms of relationship, but alll waiting to hear from Beynon -
!;arbeau's Tsimshian interpreter, for comparative Taimshian data.
(Boas' material docs not seem completely satisfactory).
'Olree years later, Sapir (1921b, 1921c) published statements that
included Tsimshian as a northern outlier of Penutian. It bears
remarking that by this time, Sapir himself had done a fair bit of
linguistic work on Nisgha and Coast Tsimshian with several men who had
come to Ottawa in connection with land claim matters, he had obtained
Coast Tsimshian kinterms from Beynon, he hod discussed some Tsimshianic
kinterms with Theresa ~myer (later, Durlach) and of course he had read
and worked thrcugh Boaa' published materials on the two languagea.
In his famous 1929 classification (foreshadowed in Sapir 1921b)
where he grouped all North American native languages and some Central
AQerican ones into one or another of six superstocks, Sapir included
"Tsimshian" as one of six co-ordinate branches within the Penutian
superstock. Sapir (1929[1949):175) also characterized the Penutian
languages structurally in this way:
TI,e Penutian lang9ages are far less cumbersome in structure than
[Eskimo-Aleut, Algonkin-Wakashan, and Nadene) but are more tightly
knit, presenting many analogies to the Indo-European languages;
make use of suffixes of formal, rather than concrete, significance;
show many types of inner stem chant;e; and possess true nominal
cases, for the most part. Chinook seems to have developed a
secondary "polyaynthetic" form on the basis of a broken down form
of Penutian; while Tsimshian aad ~midu have probably been
considerably influenced by contact with Mosan [Waksshnn nnd
Salishan) and with Shoshonean and Hokan respectively.
Beyond the references cited, Sapir published no detailed evidence for
the relationship, but the force of his genius and brilliance was such
that many scholars uncritically accepted the Penutian connection of the
Tsimshian languages as definite and established.
11
In 1956, Dell Hymes prepared a paper, "The Relationship of
Tsimshian and Chinookan", in which he undertook to reconstruct what
evidence mitlht have inspired Sapir's hypothesis of their relationship.
Jle reviewed what was then known of the history of Sapir's proposal of
the Tsimshian languages as belonging to Penutian, he listed a number of
u)'parent Nisgha, Coast Tsimshian and Chinookan grammatical and lexical
correspondences, and he noted some systematic sound correspondences.
Hymes found that there was such evidence to suggest the relationship.
In retrospect, one can soy that Hymes undertook a difficult task, given
the poor phonetic quality of the Nisgha and Coast Tsimshian materials he
had available to work With, not to mention the lack of good modern
descriptive analyses of the two languages then.
Recently, Hichael Silverstein (1979) published an overview of
Penutian research that presents a sober and perceptive appraisal of the
situation at hand. Silverstein notes that the Tsimshianic languages
diverge markedly in syntactic type from the Penutian archetype as
defined by Sapir. They display "a tightly-knit phrase-level cHsis as
the productive morphosyntactic apparatua", and they encode case-
relations at the surface level primarily through "strict constituent
order" (Silverstein 1979:659, 669). This contrasts greatly with the
structural type, say, of Yokuts, a quintessential Penutian language with
nominal case-suffixes. Sapir considered the present Tsimshian
structursl type - what Rigsby (1975) termed "an analytic ergative
syntax" - to be the product of contact with the Wakashan and Salishan
languages, especially with Kwakiutl.
However, it is precisely this same
structural type which gr~tical reconstruction indicates to be archaic
within the Tsimshian fami1y.
And the sorts of morphosyntactic
relationships that Silverstein was able to identify in an unpublished
(1969) paper which llIay link the Tsimshian languages to the southern
Penutian languages involve exactly this same phrasal syntax.
Silverstein (1969) proposed that the /1an/ transitive subject relative
clause proclitic and /nG-1 alienable possession prefix (in Coast
Tsimshian; it is also a fossilized kinterm prefix in all the Tsimshian
languages) were the reflexes of an earlier single syntactive formative,
and he compared its construction type with similar constructions which
are reconstructable in Coos, Alsea, and Yokuts, but he did not reach a
firm conclusion of their genetic relationship.
The inclusion of the Tsimshian language fI!".ily within the great
Penutian stock, then, remains unproven and problematic. The
relationship cannot be established on the basis of a handful of
resemblant lexical items as seen in:
Coast Tsimshian - guu1p!!!!!!. (of abstrsct. objects: of round
objects; gulapdaat!!!!!. (of persons aboard any conveyance); gip!'oll
!!!!!. (of fathoms; of measures); Aalbeeltk ~
(of canoes) - forms
from Dunn (1978).
Nisgha - g11,,'il IkUp-1,,11 ~
(things; and abstract count);
galp
Iknlpl testicles; gilpwa /kUp-wal !!!!!. bundles of skins;
Aalbee'etkws !q,-'-lpe·?-tk'#-s/ two ~.
(jitksan - gilbil /kilp-6l/ !!!!!. (things; and abstract count); galp
Ikalpl testicles.
12
280

These forms~o . .:lude a recurrent partial in I-lp-I that has a shape
similar to the /lvp-/ - /nVp/ root for ~
that is found in such
Southern Plateau languages as Nez Perce, Cayuse, Sahaptin, /·Iolala and
Klamath (see Rigsby lY65:109-152).
However, we cannot provide a
detailed genetic hypothesis that includes a series of motivated
historical transformations that can derive the synchronic grammatical
forms in the several languages from a cOllUDon original granunatical
construction and thus establish their genetic relationship beyond doubt
(Tarpent 1983a:06-68 proposes etymologies for the Nisgha for~s built 011
the root in question).
In fact, there is good reason to believe that
nUDlerals and numeral systems diffuse easily among languages in such
interlingual social contexts as trade and gambling (Rigsby 1965:151).
Nonetheless, the resemblances above call out for some kind of historical
explanation; they are unlikely to be chance convergences of sound and
meaning. Silverstein's unpublished (1976) "Time Persllective in Northern
and l,estern Penutian" paper, among other matters, explores some of the
social organizational features of Pacific North\~est language cOllUDunities
and speech conuuunities and their relevance to the geographical
distribution of the Penutian languages outside California.
He concludes
(I'. 9) with:
The real enigma, to my mind, is constituted by Tsimshian, for
its position must imply movement, either by the ancestors of those
who now speak it, or by the anCestors of those who spoke everything
else in Penutian, or, worse still, by the ancestors of everyone in
between. This problem takes us far beyond the temporal and
linguistic bounds of Penutian itself, however.
I agree with Silverstein (1979:681) that if we are to make any
progress on the front of the wider range genetic relationship of the
'l'simsldan language family, we need to do "careful comparative study of
lexical formations with derivational suffixes." At the same tillie,
however, we should also give greater priority to exploring the
dimensions of the areal historical relations of the Tsimshianic
languages to the neighbouring Kwakiutlan languaues, particularly to
lleiltsuk.
In fact, a systematic comparison of Tsimshianic and
KIJakiutlan gra;runatical constructions remains to be done; the parallels
that Sapir thought he could discern need to be made explicit and
appraised in the histories of the two language families.
For a start, I
sugr,est that they include at least a Verb - Subject - Object basic
constitucnt ordering follolled by peripheral, oblique constituents in
independent clauses. The grammatical relations of major constituents in
such clauses are indicated not only by their ordering, but also by
enclitics that precede their syntactic host, but are suffixed to the
preceding elclJent.
/loth Tsimshianic a 1111 I:wakiutlan focus constituents
by moving them into sentence-initial position, but in the Tsimshiallic
lailguages, predication and focusing are done by different formal
patterns.
In Kwakiutlan, I think, predication and focusing are
conflated, so that predicates are always (usually) focused; lOy knowledge
of Kwakiutlan structure comes mainly from Levine's work on Kwakwala (see
Levine 1%1), 19::;1).
In the 'l'simshianic Inngua:les, there is a Subject - Verb - Object
ordering found in dependent (subordinate) clauses. 'fhis SVO orderin~ is
surely older than the VSO one, and the dependent order subject
pronominal clitics display striking resemblances to the first, second,
and third person pronominal elements found in other {'cnulian langua:;cs.
281
They arc: In@1 lSG, /101::/ 2SG, /mg ••• s@m/ 2PL, and It I 3SG/PL .. ,,_,
In the meantime, the conservative position is to speak of the
Tsimshian 1anlluage family as an isolate. Its genetic relationship to
other Penutian languages has not yet been de,monstrated or established,
but for the record, I suspect that Sapir was correct and we will be able
to do that in coming yeara.
References
Adams, John W.
196Y
The politics of feasting among the Gitksan.
Ph.D.
Thesis.
Department of Social Relations, Harvard University.
1973
The Cilksan potlatch: population flux, resource ownership
and reciprocity. Toronto and Montreal: 1I0lt, Rinehart and Winston of
Canada, Ltd.
1974
Dialectics and contingency in '~he story
ethnographic note.
In The Unconscioua in culture. The
Claude Levi-Strauss in perspective. Ed. by Ino Rossi.
Dutton and Co., Inc.
Pp. 170-178.
~loomfield, Leonard
of Asdiwal": an
atructuralism of
New York: E.P.
1927
Literate and illiterate speech.
American Speech 2:432-
439.
Uoas, Franz
lUSb
Die Tsimshian.
Zeitschrift fUr Ethnologie 20:231-247.
l88Y
First general report on the Indians of British Columbia.
Fifth report of the Committee on the Northwestern Tribes of Canada.
Report of the 59th meeting of the British Association for the
;.dvancement of Science. Pp. 5-97.
lY02
TsilOshian texts.
Bureau of American Ethnology.
Bulletin
27.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
1911a
Languages.
PI'. 5-83.
Introduction.
Iwndbook of North American Indian
Part 1.
Bureau of American Ethnology. Bulletin 40, Part 1.
1911b
TsilOshian.
Handbook of North American Indian Languages.
Part 1.
Bureau of American Ethnology.
Bulletin 40, Part 1.
PI'. 283-
422.
1916
Tsimshian mythology. Thirty-First Annual I(eport of the
Ilureau of American Ethnology.
iJashington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office.
Dorian, ~ancy C.
1<)77
The problem of the semi-speaker in language death.
14
282

International Journal of the Sociology of Lan~uage 12:23-32.
1981
Language death.
The life cycle of a Scottish Gaelic
dialect. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
1982
Defininll the speech cOllllllunity to include its working
margins.
In Sociolinguistic variation in speech conununities.
[W. by
Suzanne Romaine.
London: Edward Arnold.
Pp. 25-33.
Dorsey, George A.
11397
The geography of the Tsilllshian Indians. The American
Antiquarian 19:276-282.
Duff, Wilson
1904a
The Indian history of British Columbia.
Volume 1. The
impact of the white man.
Anthropology in British Columbia, Hemoir No.
5. Victoria: Provincial HuseuIII of British Columbia.
Dunn, John A.
1976a
Tsimshian internal relations reconsidered. llanuscript.
A slightly different version was published as 197Gb.
1976b
TsilDshian internal relations reconsitlered: Southern
Tsimshian.
In The Victoria Conference on Northwestern Languages. Ed.
by &arbara S. Efrat. Heritage Record No.4. British Columbia
Provincial Huseum.
Pp. 62-82.
1978
A practical dictionary of the Coast Taimshian language.
National Nuseum of Han Mercury Series. Canadian Ethnology Service
Papere l~o. 42.
Ottawa.
1979
A reference grammar for the Const Tsimshian langua3e.
l'tational Nuseum of Han 11ercury Series. Canadian Ethnology Service Pnper
No. 55.
Ottawa.
Garfield, Viola E.
1939
Tsimshian clan and society. University of Washington
Publications in Anthropology 7:3:167-340.
Gleason, Il.A., Jr.
1961
An introduction to descriptive linguistics.
New York:
ilolt, Rinehart and Winston.
Golla, Victor, ed.
1 %4
The Sapi r-Kroeber correspondence.
l:eport ii6, Survey of
California and Indian Langunges.
University of California, Berkeley.
Gu{,don, ~larie-Franioisc
1977
Tsimshian shamanic images.
An introduction to Tsimshion
15
283
Hnloit. Unpublished paper.
Haugen, Einar
196&
Dialect, language, nation.
American Anthropologist
68:4:922-935.
Hockett, Charles F.
1958
A course in modern linguistiCS.
New York: The HacHlillan
Company.
Hymes, Dell
1956
The relationship of Tsimshian and Chinookan.
Un-
published paper.
1960
Linguistic problems in defining the concept of "trihe".
In Essays on the problem of tribe. Ed. by June IIelm.
Proceedings of
the 1967 Annual Spring ~leeting. American Ethnological Society.
Pp. 23-
48.
Hymes, Virginia iJ.
1975
The ethnography of linguistic intuitions at Warm Springs.
in The second LACUS forum.
Ed. by Peter A. Reich.
Columbia, S.C.:
1I0rnbeam Press.
Pp. 29-36.
Kasakoff, Alice B.
1970
Explicit and implicit marriage rules among the Gitksan.
Ph.D. Thesis.
Department of Social Relations, Harvard University.
1974
Levi-Strauss' idea of the social unconscious: the problem
of elelnentary and complex structures in Gitksan marriage choice.
In The
unconscious in culture. The structuralism of Claude Levi-Strauss in
perspective. Ed. by Ino Rossi.
New York: E.P. Dutton and Co., Inc.
Pp. 143-1u9.
1976
Open and closed marriage systems on the northwest coast.
Unpublished paper presented at the Northwest Coast Studies Conference,
~:ay 12-10, 1976, Sillton Fraser University.
Levine, P.obert Daigon
lYiJO
On the lexical orinin of the Kwakwala Passive.
International Journal of American Linguistics 46:4:240-258.
19J1
Passives and controllability in Kwakwala.
Glossa
14:2:139-167.
Levine, Robert and freda Cooper
1979
The suppression of B.C. lan3uages: filling in the tlaps in
the documentary record.
Sound Heritage 1 :3..'1.4:43-75.
lu
284

Houlton,I'':L'r.£iam G.
1985
Review of lIandbuch zur niederdeitschen srlracn- und
Literatur/,dssenschaft. Ed. by GerlWrd Cortes and Dieter H hn-.-
Language 'in Society 14:3:403-407.
Mulder, Jean
1980
The Tsimshian english dialect: the result of language
interference.
Unpublished paper presented at the 15th International
Conference on Salishan Languages.
Powell, John Wesley
1891
Indian linguistic families of America north of tlexico.
Seventh Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology.
\~Qshington, D.C.:
Governr.tent Printing Office.
Rigsby, Bruce
1965
Linguistic relations in the Southern Plateau. Ph.D.
Thesis. Department of Anthropology, University of Oregon.
1967
Tsiwshian comparative vocabularies with notes on Nass-
Gitksan systematic phonology.
Unpublished paper presented at the Second
International Conference on Salishan Languages in Seattle.
1~69
Some linguistic insights into recent Tsimshian
prehistory.
Unpublished paper presented to lIarvard Linlluistics Club.
1970
A note on Nass-Gitksan speech-play. International
Journal of American Unguis tics 36:3:212-215.
1975
Nass-Gitksan: an analytic ergative syntax. International
Journal of American Linguistics 41:346-354.
Rigsby, bruce and John Dunn
19613
Tsimshian internal relations. Unpublished paper
presented at the Annual lIeeting of the American Anthropological
Association in Seattle.
[(i3sl>y, lkuce and Peter Sutton
19!1U-l~82
Spe~ch cOllu~unities in Aboriginal Australia.
Anthropological Forum 5;1:8-23.
i(ohner, l:onald P., cd.
196~
The ethnography of Franz Doas.
Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press. (translated by lIedy Parker].
\{olllaiae, SU:Ganne
19132
.Ihat is a speech conuuunity7
in Sociolinnuistic variation
in speech communities.
Ed. by Suzanne ROlllaine.
I.ondon: Rd,mrd Arnold.
I'p. 13-24.
17
285
Sapir, ~ward
191(, (1949)
Tillie perspective in aboriginal AlDCrican culture: a
study in IDethod.
Canada llepartlDCnt of I·lines, Geological Survey, llelllOir#
9U.
l:"printed in Selected writings of J:"".dward Sapir.
~. by David G.
Handelbaum.
Uerkeley: University of California Press.
Pp. 389-462.
1'.:11t>
Letter to Robert II. Lowie of July 6, 1918. Letters from
Edward Sapir to Robert II. Lewie.
With introduction and notes by Robert
II. Lowie.
Berkeley.
1965.
PI'. 27-28.
1920
Nass River terms of relationship.
American
Anthrol'ologist 22:261-271.
1921b
A bird's-eye view of American languages north of Nexico.
Science. n.s. 54:408.
1921c
A characteristic Penutian form of stew. International
Journal of American Linguistics 2:58-67.
1921d
A /laida kinship term alllOng the Tsillshian.
Alaerican
Anthropologist 23:233-234.
1929 (1949]
Centrsl and North American languages.
Encyclopaedia
~ritannica. 14th ed., vol. 5, pp. 1lU-141. Reprinted in Selected
\':ritings of i::dward Sapir. Pp. 169-178.
Sherzer, Joel and Richard .Bauman
1972
Ares1 studies and culture history: language as II key to
the historical study of culture contact. Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology 2U:2:142-143.
Silverstein, Nichael
19(,9
Tsimshian and Penutian possessives.
Unpublished paper.
l~rvard University.
1976
'l'i1DC perspective ia northern and western Penutian.
Paper
written for the Northwest Coast Studies Conference, ~my 12-16, 197u,
held at Simon Fraser University.
1979
Penutilln: an assesslllCnt. in The languages of native
America: historical and comparative assessment.
Ed. by Lyle Campbell
and ,'wriallne Mithun.
PI'. 650-691.
Austin and London: University of
Texas i'ress.
Tarjlent, ~larie-Lucie
193u
NisUha plural-formation.
An analysis of the
morphophonemics.
Unpublished paper. University of Victoria. A
revision of this was published as Tarpent 1983b.
1981b
Them Fred: Factors in the evolution of a Tsimshianism.
The \~orl~ing PapiirS"oTtiie XVI ICSL (International Conference on Salishan
Languages].
University of ~wntana. Occasional Papers in Linguistics
j~o. 2.
18
286
